add v6.5.0 release notes (#11554)
pingcap/docs: releases/release-6.5.0.md

---
title: TiDB 6.5.0 Release Notes
---

# TiDB 6.5.0 Release Notes

Release date: xx xx, 2022

TiDB version: 6.5.0

Quick access: [Quick start](https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/v6.5/quick-start-with-tidb) | [Production deployment](https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/v6.5/production-deployment-using-tiup) | [Installation packages](https://www.pingcap.com/download/?version=v6.5.0#version-list)

TiDB 6.5.0 is a Long-Term Support Release (LTS).

> 相比于前一个 LTS (即 6.1.0 版本)，6.5.0 版本包含 [6.2.0-DMR](/releases/release-6.2.0.md)、[6.3.0-DMR](/releases/release-6.3.0.md)、[6.4.0-DMR](/releases/release-6.4.0.md) 中已发布的新功能、提升改进和错误修复，并引入了以下关键特性：

Author: ```suggestion
Compared with the previous LTS 6.1.0, 6.5.0 not only incorporates new features, improvements, and bug fixes in [6.2.0-DMR](/releases/release-6.2.0.md), [6.3.0-DMR](/releases/release-6.3.0.md), [6.4.0-DMR](/releases/release -6.4.0.md), but also introduces the following key features and improvements:
```

    TiDB v6.2.0 introduces the [Cost Model Version 2](/cost-model.md#cost-model-version-2) as an experimental feature. This model uses a more accurate cost estimation method to help the optimizer choose the optimal execution plan. Especially when TiFlash is deployed, Cost Model Version 2 automatically helps choose the appropriate storage engine and avoids much manual intervention. After real-scene testing for a period of time, this model becomes GA in v6.5.0. SInce v6.5.0, newly-created clusters use Cost Model Version 2 by default. For clusters upgrade to v6.5.0, because Cost Model Version 2 might cause changes to query plans, you can set the [`tidb_cost_model_version = 2`](/system-variables.md#tidb_cost_model_version-new-in-v620) variable to use the new cost model after sufficient performance testing.

    Cost Model Version 2 becomes a generally available feature that significantly improves the overall capability of the TiDB optimizer and helps TiDB evolve towards a more powerful HTAP database.

    For more information, see [User document](/cost-model.md#cost-model-version-2).

> * TiFlash 对获取表行数的操作进行针对优化 [#37165](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/37165) @[elsa0520](https://github.com/elsa0520)

Author: ```suggestion
* TiFlash 对获取表行数的操作进行针对优化 [#37165](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/37165) @[elsa0520](https://github.com/elsa0520) **tw@TomShawn**
```

>     在数据分析的场景中，通过无过滤条件的 `count(*)` 获取表的实际行数是一个常见操作。 TiFlash 在新版本中优化了 `count(*)` 的改写，自动选择带有“非空”属性的数据类型最短的列进行计数， 可以有效降低 TiFlash 上发生的 I/O 数量，进而提升获取表行数的执行效率。

Reviewer: * TiFlash optimizes the operations of getting the number of table rows [#37165](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/37165) @[elsa0520](https://github.com/elsa0520)

    In the scenarios of data analysis, It is a common operation to get the actual number of rows of a table through `COUNT(*)` without filter conditions. In v6.5.0, TiFlash optimizes the rewriting of `COUNT(*)` and automatically selects the not-null columns with the shortest column definition to count the number of rows, which can effectively reduce the number of I/O operations in TiFlash and improve the execution efficiency of getting row count.

    ```sql
    CREATE TABLE t(a int AUTO_INCREMENT key) AUTO_ID_CACHE 1;
    ```

    For more information, see [User document](/auto-increment.md#mysql-compatibility-mode).

### Data migration

* 支持导出和导入压缩后的 CSV、SQL 文件 [#38514](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/38514) @[lichunzhu](https://github.com/lichunzhu) **tw@hfxsd**

    Dumpling 支持将数据导出为 SQL、CSV 的压缩文件，支持 gzip/snappy/zstd 三种压缩格式。Lightning 支持导入压缩后的 SQL、CSV 文件，支持gzip/snappy/zstd 三种压缩格式。

    之前用户导出数据或者导入数据都需要提供较大的存储空间，用于存储导出或者即将导入的非压缩后的 csv 、sql文件，导致存储成本增加。该功能发布后，通过压缩存储空间，可以大大降低用户的存储成本。

    更多信息，请参考[用户文档](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/38514)。

> * 优化了 binlog 解析能力 [#无](无) @[gmhdbjd](https://github.com/GMHDBJD) **tw@hfxsd**
> 
>     可将不在迁移任务里的库、表对象的 binlog event 过滤掉不做解析，从而提升解析效率和稳定性。该策略在 6.5 版本默认生效，用户无需额外操作。
> 
>     原先用户仅迁移少数几张表，也需要解析上游整个 binlog 文件，即仍需要解析该 binlog 文件中不需要迁移的表的 binlog event，效率会比较低，同时如果不在迁移任务里的库表的 binlog event 不支持解析，还会导致任务失败。通过只解析在迁移任务里的库表对象的 binlog event 可以大大提升 binlog 解析效率，提升任务稳定性。

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Optimize binlog parsing capability [#924](https://github.com/pingcap/dm/issues/924) @[gmhdbjd](https://github.com/GMHDBJD) **tw@hfxsd**

    TiDB can filter out binlog events of schema and table objects that are not in the migration task, thus improving the parsing efficiency and stability. This policy takes effect by default in v6.5.0. No additional configuration is required.
    
    Previously, even if only a few tables were migrated, the entire binlog file upstream had to be parsed. The binlog events of the tables in the binlog file that did not need to be migrated still had to be parsed, which was not efficient. Meanwhile, if the binlog events of the schemas and tables that are not in the migration task do not support parsing, the task will fail. By only parsing the binlog events of the tables in the migration task, the binlog parsing efficiency can be greatly improved and the task stability can be enhanced.
```

> * TiDB Lightning 支持  disk quota 特性 GA，可避免 TiDB Lightning 任务写满本地磁盘 [#无](无) @[buchuitoudegou](https://github.com/buchuitoudegou) **tw@hfxsd**
> 
>     你可以为 TiDB Lightning 配置磁盘配额 (disk quota)。当磁盘配额不足时，TiDB Lightning 会暂停读取源数据以及写入临时文件的过程，优先将已经完成排序的 key-value 写入到 TiKV。TiDB Lightning 删除本地临时文件后，再继续导入过程。
> 
>     有这个功能之前，TiDB Lightning 在使用物理模式导入数据时，会在本地磁盘创建大量的临时文件，用来对原始数据进行编码、排序、分割。当用户本地磁盘空间不足时，TiDB Lightning 会由于写入文件失败而报错退出。
> 
>     更多信息，请参考[用户文档]( https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/v6.4/tidb-lightning-physical-import-mode-usage#configure-disk-quota-new-in-v620)。

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* The disk quota in TiDB Lightning is GA. It can prevent TiDB Lightning tasks from overwriting local disks [#无](无) @[buchuitoudegou](https://github.com/buchuitoudegou) **tw@hfxsd**

    You can configure disk quota for TiDB Lightning. When there is not enough disk quota, TiDB Lightning will pause the process of reading the source data and writing temporary files, and write the sorted key-values to TiKV first, and then continue the import process after TiDB Lightning deletes the local temporary files.

    Previously, when TiDB Lightning imported data using physical mode, it would create a large number of temporary files on local disk for encoding, sorting, and splitting the raw data. When your local disk ran out of space, TiDB Lightning would exit with an error due to a failed write file.

    For more information, see [User document](/tidb-lightning/tidb-lightning-physical-import-mode-usage.md#configure-disk-quota-new-in-v620).
```

> * GA DM 增量数据校验的功能 [#4426](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/4426) @[D3Hunter](https://github.com/D3Hunter) **tw@hfxsd**
> 
>     在将增量数据从上游迁移到下游数据库的过程中，数据的流转有小概率导致错误或者丢失的情况。对于需要依赖于强数据一致的场景，如信贷、证券等业务，你可以在数据迁移完成之后对数据进行全量校验，确保数据的一致性。然而，在某些增量复制的业务场景下，上游和下游的写入是持续的、不会中断的，因为上下游的数据在不断变化，导致用户难以对表里面的全部数据进行一致性校验。
> 
>     过去，需要中断业务，做全量数据校验，会影响用户业务。现在推出该功能后，在一些不可中断的业务场景，无需中断业务，通过该功能就可以实现增量数据校验。
> 
>     更多信息，请参考[用户文档]( https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/v6.4/dm-continuous-data-validation)。

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Continuous data validation in DM is GA [#4426](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/4426) @[D3Hunter](https://github.com/D3Hunter) **tw@hfxsd**

    In the process of migrating incremental data from upstream to downstream databases, there is a small probability that the flow of data will lead to errors or data loss. For scenarios that rely on strong data consistency, such as credit, and securities businesses, you can perform a full volume checksum on the data after the data migration is complete to ensure data consistency. However, in some scenarios with incremental replication, upstream and downstream writes are continuous and uninterrupted because the upstream and downstream data is constantly changing, making it difficult for you to perform consistency checks on all the data in the tables.

    Previously, you needed to interrupt the business to do the full data verification, which would affect your business. Now, with the introduction of this feature, you can perform incremental data verification without interrupting the business.

    For more information, see [User document](/dm/dm-continuous-data-validation.md).
```

* TiCDC supports replicating changed logs to storage sinks [tiflow#6797](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/6797) @[zhaoxinyu](https://github.com/zhaoxinyu) **tw@shichun-0415**

     TiCDC supports replicating changed logs to Amazon S3, Azure Blob Storage, NFS, and other S3-compatible storage services. Cloud storage is reasonably priced and easy to use. If you do not want to use Kafka, you can use storage sinks. TiCDC saves the changed logs to a file and then sends it to the storage system. From the storage system, the consumer program reads the newly generated changed log files periodically.

>     The storage sink supports changed logs in the canal-json and CSV formats. Noticeably, the latency of replicating changed logs from TiCDC to storage can be xx. For more information, see [User document](/ticdc/ticdc-sink-to-cloud-storage.md).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    The storage sink supports changed logs in the canal-json and CSV formats. Noticeably, the latency of replicating changed logs from TiCDC to storage can be as short as xx. For more information, see [User document](/ticdc/ticdc-sink-to-cloud-storage.md).
```

  In the log restore stage, the restore speed of one TiKV can reach xx MB/s, which is x times faster than before. The restore speed is scalable and the RTO in DR scenarios is reduced greatly. The RPO in DR scenarios can be as short as 5 minutes. In normal cluster operation and maintenance (OM), for example, a rolling upgrade is performed or only one TiKV is down, the RPO can be 5 minutes.

* TiKV-BR GA: Supports backing up and restoring RawKV [#67](https://github.com/tikv/migration/issues/67) @[pingyu](https://github.com/pingyu) @[haojinming](https://github.com/haojinming) **tw@shichun-0415**

    TiKV-BR is a backup and restore tool used in TiKV clusters. TiKV and PD can constitute a KV database when used without TiDB, which is called RawKV. TiKV-BR supports data backup and restore for products that use RawKV. TiKV-BR can also upgrade the [`api-version`](/tikv-configuration-file.md#api-version-new-in-v610) from `API V1` to `API V2` for TiKV cluster.

    For more information, see [User document](https://tikv.org/docs/latest/concepts/explore-tikv-features/backup-restore/).

## Compatibility changes

### System variables

| Variable name | Change type | Description |

> |--------|------------------------------|------|

Author: ```suggestion
|--------|------------------------------|------|
|[`tidb_enable_amend_pessimistic_txn`](/system-variables.md#tidb_enable_amend_pessimistic_txn-new-in-v407)| Deprecated | Starting from v6.5.0, this variable is deprecated, and TiDB uses the [Metadata Lock](/metadata-lock.md) feature by default to avoid the `Information schema is changed` error. |
```

    - Checkpoint 支持拉取模式 [#13824](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/13824) @[YuJuncen](https://github.com/YuJuncen)
    - 升级 crossbeam-channel 以优化发送端的自旋问题 [#13815](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/13815) @[sticnarf](https://github.com/sticnarf)
    - Coprocessor 支持批量处理 [#13849](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/13849) @[cfzjywxk](https://github.com/cfzjywxk)
    - 故障恢复时通知 TiKV 唤醒休眠的 region 以减少等待时间 [#13648](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/13648) @[LykxSassinator](https://github.com/LykxSassinator)
    - 通过代码优化减少内存申请 [#13836](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/pull/13836) @[BusyJay](https://github.com/BusyJay)
    - 引入 raft extension 以提升代码可扩展性 [#13864](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/pull/13864) @[BusyJay](https://github.com/BusyJay)
    - 通过引入 `hint_min_ts` 加速 flashback [#13842](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/pull/13842)  @[JmPotato](https://github.com/JmPotato)
    - tikv-ctl 支持查询某个 key 范围中包含哪些 Region  [#13768](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/pull/13768) [@HuSharp](https://github.com/HuSharp)
    - 改进持续对特定行只加锁但不更新情况下的读写性能 [#13694](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/13694) [@sticnarf](https://github.com/sticnarf)

> + PD
> 
>     - 优化锁的粒度以减少锁争用，提升高并发下心跳的处理能力 [#5586](https://github.com/tikv/pd/issues/5586) @[rleungx](https://github.com/rleungx)
>     - 优化调度器在大规模集群下的性能问题，提升调度策略生产速度 [#5473](https://github.com/tikv/pd/issues/5473) @[bufferflies](https://github.com/bufferflies)
>     - 增加 btree 的泛型性支持 [#5606](https://github.com/tikv/pd/issues/5606) @[rleungx](https://github.com/rleungx)
>     - 优化心跳处理过程，减少一些不要的开销 [#5648](https://github.com/tikv/pd/issues/5648)@[rleungx](https://github.com/rleungx)
>     - 增加了自动清理 tombstone store 的功能 [#5348](https://github.com/tikv/pd/issues/5348) @[nolouch](https://github.com/nolouch)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
+ PD

    - Optimize the granularity of locks to reduce lock contention and improve the handling of heartbeats under high concurrency [#5586](https://github.com/tikv/pd/issues/5586) @[rleungx](https://github.com/rleungx)
    - Optimize scheduler performance for large-scale clusters and improve scheduling policy production speed [#5473](https://github.com/tikv/pd/issues/5473) @[bufferflies](https://github.com/bufferflies)
    - Improve the speed of loading regions [#5606](https://github.com/tikv/pd/issues/5606) @[rleungx](https://github.com/rleungx)
    - Improve the performance of handling region heartbeats [#5648](https://github.com/tikv/pd/issues/5648)@[rleungx](https://github.com/rleungx)
    - Add the function to automatically GC the tombstone store [#5348](https://github.com/tikv/pd/issues/5348) @[nolouch](https://github.com/nolouch)
```

+ TiFlash

>     - 提升了 TiFlash 在 SQL 端没有攒批的场景的写入性能 [#6404](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflash/issues/6404) @[lidezhu](https://github.com/lidezhu)
>     - 增加了 TableFullScan 的输出信息 [#5926](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflash/issues/5926) @[hongyunyan](https://github.com/hongyunyan)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - Improve TiFlash write performance in scenarios where there is no batch processing on the SQL side [#6404](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflash/issues/6404) @[lidezhu](https://github.com/lidezhu)
    - Add more details about TableFullScan in the `explain analyze` output [#5926](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflash/issues/5926) @[hongyunyan](https://github.com/hongyunyan)
```

+ Tools

    + TiDB Dashboard

>         - 在慢查询页面新增三个字段 `是否由 prepare 语句生成`，`查询计划是否来自缓存`，`查询计划是否来自绑定` 的描述。 [#1445](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb-dashboard/pull/1445/files) @[shhdgit](https://github.com/shhdgit)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        - Add three new fields to the slow query page: "Is Prepared?"，"Is Plan from Cache?"，"Is Plan from Binding?"  [#1445](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb-dashboard/pull/1445/files) @[shhdgit](https://github.com/shhdgit)
```

> | TiKV | [`cdc.min-ts-interval`](/tikv-configuration-file.md#min-ts-interval)  | Modified | Change the default value from `1s` to `200ms`. |

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
| TiKV | `raw-min-ts-outlier-threshold` | Deleted | Since v6.4.0, this configuration item was deprecated. Since v6.5.0, this configuration item is deleted. |
| TiKV | [`cdc.min-ts-interval`](/tikv-configuration-file.md#min-ts-interval)  | Modified | Change the default value from `1s` to `200ms`. |
```

    - 修复了 `begin; select... for update;` 点查在 read engines 未配置 TiKV 时生成非预期执行计划的问题 [#39344](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/39344) @[Yisaer](https://github.com/Yisaer)
    - 修复了错误地下推 `StreamAgg` 到 TiFlash 导致结果错误的问题 [#39266](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/39266) @[fixdb](https://github.com/fixdb)

+ TiKV

    - 修复 raft engine ctl 中的错误 [#13108](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/13108) @[tabokie](https://github.com/tabokie)
    - 修复 tikv-ctl 中 compact raft 命令的错误 [#13515](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/13515) @[guoxiangCN](https://github.com/guoxiangCN)
    - 修复当启用 TLS 时 log backup 无法使用的问题 [#13851](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/13851) @[YuJuncen](https://github.com/YuJuncen)
    - 修复对 Geometry 字段类型的支持 [#13651](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/13651) @[dveeden](https://github.com/dveeden)
    - 修复当未使用 new collation 时 `like` 无法处理 `_` 中非 ASCII 字符的问题 [#13769](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/13769) @[YangKeao](https://github.com/YangKeao)
    - 修复 tikv-ctl 执行 reset-to-version 时出现 segfault 的问题 [#13829](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/13829) @[tabokie](https://github.com/tabokie)

> + PD
> 
>     - 修复热点调度配置在没有修改的情况下不持久化的问题 [#5701](https://github.com/tikv/pd/issues/5701)  @[HunDunDM](https://github.com/HunDunDM)
>     - 修复 rank-formula-version 在升级过程中没有保持升级前的配置的问题 [#5699](https://github.com/tikv/pd/issues/5698) @[HunDunDM](https://github.com/HunDunDM)
> 
> + TiFlash
> 
>     - 修复 TiFlash 重启不能正确合并小文件的问题 [#6159](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflash/issues/6159) @[lidezhu](https://github.com/lidezhu)
>     - 修复 TiFlash Open File OPS 过高的问题 [#6345](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflash/issues/6345) @[JaySon-Huang](https://github.com/JaySon-Huang)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
+ PD

    - Fix the issue that the `balance-hot-region-scheduler` configuration is not persisted if not modified [#5701](https://github.com/tikv/pd/issues/5701)  @[HunDunDM](https://github.com/HunDunDM)
    - Fix the issue that `rank-formula-version` does not retain the pre-upgrade configuration during the upgrade process [#5699](https://github.com/tikv/pd/issues/5699) @[HunDunDM](https://github.com/HunDunDM)

+ TiFlash

    - Fix the issue that minor compaction does not work as expected after TiFlash restarts [#6159](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflash/issues/6159) @[lidezhu](https://github.com/lidezhu)
    - Fix the issue that TiFlash Open File OPS is too hight [#6345](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflash/issues/6345) @[JaySon-Huang](https://github.com/JaySon-Huang)
```

> - Starting from v6.4.0, the mysql.user table adds two new columns: `Password_reuse_history` and `Password_reuse_time`. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- Starting from v6.5.0, the `mysql.user` table adds two new columns: `Password_reuse_history` and `Password_reuse_time`. 
```

> - The [index acceleration](/system-variables.md#tidb_ddl_enable_fast_reorg-new-in-v630) feature is enabled by default and is not compatible with the [PITR (Point-in-time recovery)](/br/br-pitr-guide.md) feature. When using the index acceleration feature, you need to make sure that no PITR backup task is running in the background, otherwise unexpected results might occur. For more information, see [tidb_ddl_enable_fast_reorg](/system-variables.md#tidb_ddl_enable_fast_reorg-new-in-v630).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- The [index acceleration](/system-variables.md#tidb_ddl_enable_fast_reorg-new-in-v630) feature is enabled by default and is not compatible with the [PITR (Point-in-time recovery)](/br/br-pitr-guide.md) feature. When using the index acceleration feature, you need to make sure that no PITR backup task is running in the background; otherwise, unexpected results might occur. For more information, see [tidb_ddl_enable_fast_reorg](/system-variables.md#tidb_ddl_enable_fast_reorg-new-in-v630).
```

> ## 废弃功能
> 
> 即将于 v6.6.0 版本废弃 v4.0.7 版本引入的 Amending Transaction 机制，并使用[元数据锁](/metadata-lock.md) 替代。

Author: ```suggestion
## Removed feature

The next v6.x release of v6.5.0 (that is, v6.6.0) will deprecate the [`AMEND TRANSACTION`](/system-variables.md#tidb_enable_amend_pessimistic_txn-new-in-v407) mechanism introduced in v4.0.7 and use [metadata-lock](/metadata- lock.md) instead.
```

>     - Fix the issue that using `INSERT IGNORE INTO` to insert data of the `STRING` type into an auto-increment column of the `SMALLINT` type will raise an error [#38483](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/38483) @[hawkingrei](https://github.com/hawkingrei)

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
    - Fix the issue that using `INSERT IGNORE INTO` to insert data of the `STRING` type into an auto-increment column of the `SMALLINT` type will cause an error [#38483](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/38483) @[hawkingrei](https://github.com/hawkingrei)
```

>     - Fix the issue that the `ADMIN SHOW JOB` operation panics after upgrading from v4.0 to v6.4 [#38980](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/38980) @[tangenta](https://github.com/tangenta)

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
    - Fix the issue that the `ADMIN SHOW JOB` operation panics after upgrading from v4.0.16 to v6.4.0 [#38980](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/38980) @[tangenta](https://github.com/tangenta)
```

>     - Fixe the issue that gRPC error log messages are not redirected to the correct log file during log rotation [#38941](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/38941) @[xhebox](https://github.com/xhebox)

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
    - Fixe the issue that gRPC error logs are not redirected to the correct log file during log rotation [#38941](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/38941) @[xhebox](https://github.com/xhebox)
```

>     - Fix the issue that TiDB generates an unexpected query plan for the `BEGIN; SELECT... FOR UPDATE;` point query when TiKV is not configured for the read engine [#39344](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/39344) @[Yisaer](https://github.com/Yisaer)

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
    - Fix the issue that TiDB generates an unexpected execution plan for the `BEGIN; SELECT... FOR UPDATE;` point query when TiKV is not configured as a read engine [#39344](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/39344) @[Yisaer](https://github.com/Yisaer)
```

    + TiCDC

        - Fix the issue that TiCDC gets stuck when the PD leader crashes [#7470](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/7470) @[zeminzhou](https://github.com/zeminzhou)
        - (dup) Fix data loss occurred in the scenario of executing DDL statements first and then pausing and resuming the changefeed [#7682](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/7682) @[asddongmen](https://github.com/asddongmen)

>         - Fix the issue that TiCDC mistakenly reports an error when there is a higher version of TiFlash [#7744](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/7744) @[overvenus](https://github.com/overvenus)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        - Fix the issue that TiCDC mistakenly reports an error when there is a later version of TiFlash [#7744](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/7744) @[overvenus](https://github.com/overvenus)
```

    - Fix the support issue of the Geometry field type [#13651](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/13651) @[dveeden](https://github.com/dveeden)
    - Fix the issue that  `_` in the `LIKE` operator cannot match non-ASCII characters when new collation is not enabled [#13769](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/13769) @[YangKeao](https://github.com/YangKeao)
    - Fix the issue that tikv-ctl is terminated unexpectedly when executing the `reset-to-version` command [#13829](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/13829) @[tabokie](https://github.com/tabokie)

+ PD

    - Fix the issue that the `balance-hot-region-scheduler` configuration is not persisted if not modified [#5701](https://github.com/tikv/pd/issues/5701)  @[HunDunDM](https://github.com/HunDunDM)
    - Fix the issue that `rank-formula-version` does not retain the pre-upgrade configuration during the upgrade process [#5698](https://github.com/tikv/pd/issues/5698) @[HunDunDM](https://github.com/HunDunDM)

+ TiFlash

    - Fix the issue that minor compaction does not work as expected after TiFlash restarts [#6159](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflash/issues/6159) @[lidezhu](https://github.com/lidezhu)

>     - Fix the issue that TiFlash Open File OPS is too high [#6345](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflash/issues/6345) @[JaySon-Huang](https://github.com/JaySon-Huang)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - Fix the issue that TiFlash File Open OPS is too high [#6345](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflash/issues/6345) @[JaySon-Huang](https://github.com/JaySon-Huang)
```

+ Tools

    + Backup & Restore (BR)

        - (dup) Fix the issue that when BR deletes log backup data, it mistakenly deletes data that should not be deleted  [#38939](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/38939) @[Leavrth](https://github.com/Leavrth)
        - (dup) Fix the issue that restore tasks fail when using old framework for collations in databases or tables [#39150](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/39150) @[MoCuishle28](https://github.com/MoCuishle28)

>         - Fix the issue that backup fails because Alibaba Cloud and Huawei Cloud are not fully compatible with Amazon S3 storage [39545](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/39545) @[3pointer](https://github.com/3pointer)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
        - Fix the issue that backup fails because Alibaba Cloud and Huawei Cloud are not fully compatible with Amazon S3 storage [#11622 39545](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/39545) @[3pointer](https://github.com/3pointer)
```

---
title: TiDB 6.5.0 Release Notes
---

# TiDB 6.5.0 Release Notes

Release date: xx xx, 2022

TiDB version: 6.5.0

Quick access: [Quick start](https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/v6.5/quick-start-with-tidb) | [Production deployment](https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/v6.5/production-deployment-using-tiup) | [Installation packages](https://www.pingcap.com/download/?version=v6.5.0#version-list)

TiDB 6.5.0 is a Long-Term Support Release (LTS).

Compared with the previous LTS 6.1.0, 6.5.0 not only includes new features, improvements, and bug fixes released in [6.2.0-DMR](/releases/release-6.2.0.md), [6.3.0-DMR](/releases/release-6.3.0.md), [6.4.0-DMR](/releases/release-6.4.0.md), but also introduces the following key features and improvements:

> - Enable [index acceleration](/system-variables.md#tidb_ddl_enable_fast_reorg-new-in-v630) by default, which improves the performance of adding indexes by 10 times compared with v6.1.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- Enable [index acceleration](/system-variables.md#tidb_ddl_enable_fast_reorg-new-in-v630) by default, which improves the performance of adding indexes by 10 times compared with v6.1.0.
```

> - Enable [index acceleration](/system-variables.md#tidb_ddl_enable_fast_reorg-new-in-v630) by default, which improves the performance of adding indexes by about 10 times compared with v6.1.0.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- The [index acceleration](/system-variables.md#tidb_ddl_enable_fast_reorg-new-in-v630) feature becomes generally available (GA), which improves the performance of adding indexes by about 10 times compared with v6.1.0.
```

> - Support TiDB global memory control via [`tidb_server_memory_limit`](/system-variables.md#tidb_server_memory_limit-new-in-v640).

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- The TiDB global memory control becomes GA, and you can control the memory consumption threshold via [`tidb_server_memory_limit`](/system-variables.md#tidb_server_memory_limit-new-in-v640).
```

> - The TiDB global memory control becomes GA, and you can control the memory consumption threshold via [`tidb_server_memory_limit`](/system-variables.md#tidb_server_memory_limit-new-in-v640).

Author: ```suggestion
- The TiDB global memory control feature becomes GA, which allows you to control the memory consumption threshold globally via [`tidb_server_memory_limit`](/system-variables.md#tidb_server_memory_limit-new-in-v640).
```

> - Support a high-performance and globally monotonic [`AUTO_INCREMENT`](/auto-increment.md#mysql-compatible-mode) column attribute, compatible with MySQL.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- Support a high-performance and globally monotonic [`AUTO_INCREMENT`](/auto-increment.md#mysql-compatible-mode) column attribute, which is compatible with MySQL.
```

> - Support a high-performance and globally monotonic [`AUTO_INCREMENT`](/auto-increment.md#mysql-compatible-mode) column attribute, which is compatible with MySQL.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- The high-performance and globally monotonic [`AUTO_INCREMENT`](/auto-increment.md#mysql-compatible-mode) column attribute becomes GA, which is compatible with MySQL.
```

> - Support [`FLASHBACK CLUSTER TO TIMESTAMP`](/sql-statements/sql-statement-flashback-to-timestamp.md), compatible with TiCDC and PITR.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- Support restoring a cluster to a specific point in time by using [`FLASHBACK CLUSTER TO TIMESTAMP`](/sql-statements/sql-statement-flashback-to-timestamp.md), compatible with TiCDC and PITR.
```

> - Support restoring a cluster to a specific point in time by using [`FLASHBACK CLUSTER TO TIMESTAMP`](/sql-statements/sql-statement-flashback-to-timestamp.md), compatible with TiCDC and PITR.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- Support restoring a cluster to a specific point in time by using [`FLASHBACK CLUSTER TO TIMESTAMP`](/sql-statements/sql-statement-flashback-to-timestamp.md), which is compatible with TiCDC and PITR.
```

> - Support restoring a cluster to a specific point in time by using [`FLASHBACK CLUSTER TO TIMESTAMP`](/sql-statements/sql-statement-flashback-to-timestamp.md), which is compatible with TiCDC and PITR.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- Support restoring a cluster to a specific point in time by using [`FLASHBACK CLUSTER TO TIMESTAMP`](/sql-statements/sql-statement-flashback-to-timestamp.md) (GA), which is compatible with TiCDC and PITR.
```

> - Enhance the [optimizer cost model](/cost-model.md#cost-model-version-2) and further enhance the [INDEX MERGE](/glossary.md#index-merge) feature.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- Optimizer further enhances the more accurate [Cost Model] version 2](/cost-model.md#cost-model-version-2) and further enhance the [INDEX MERGE](/glossary.md#index-merge) feature to support conjunctive normal form.
```

> - Optimizer further enhances the more accurate [Cost Model] version 2](/cost-model.md#cost-model-version-2) and further enhance the [INDEX MERGE](/glossary.md#index-merge) feature to support conjunctive normal form.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Optimizer further enhances the more accurate [Cost Model] version 2](/cost-model.md#cost-model-version-2) and further enhance the [INDEX MERGE](/glossary.md#index-merge) feature to support the expressions connected by `AND`.
```

> - Optimizer further enhances the more accurate [Cost Model] version 2](/cost-model.md#cost-model-version-2) and further enhance the [INDEX MERGE](/glossary.md#index-merge) feature to support conjunctive normal form.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- Optimizer introduces a more accurate [Cost Model version 2](/cost-model.md#cost-model-version-2) (GA) and further enhances the [INDEX MERGE](/glossary.md#index-merge) feature to support the expressions connected by `AND`.
```

> - Optimizer further enhances the more accurate [Cost Model] version 2](/cost-model.md#cost-model-version-2) and further enhance the [INDEX MERGE](/glossary.md#index-merge) feature to support the expressions connected by `AND`.

Author: ```suggestion
- Optimizer further enhances the more accurate [Cost Model version 2](/cost-model.md#cost-model-version-2) and further enhance the [INDEX MERGE](/glossary.md#index-merge) feature to support the expressions connected by `AND`.
```

- Support pushing down the `JSON_EXTRACT()` function to TiFlash.
- Support [password management](/password-management.md) policies that meet password compliance auditing requirements.
- TiDB Lightning and Dumpling support [importing](tidb-lightning/tidb-lightning-data-source.md) and [exporting](/dumpling-overview.md#improve-export-efficiency-through-concurrency) compressed SQL and CSV files.

> - TiDB Data Migration (DM) [continuous data validation](/dm/dm-continuous-data-validation.md) is now in General Availability (GA).

Author: ```suggestion
- TiDB Data Migration (DM) [continuous data validation](/dm/dm-continuous-data-validation.md) becomes GA.
```

- TiDB Backup & Restore supports snapshot checkpoint backup, improves the recovery performance of [PITR](/br-pitr-guide.md#carry-pitr) by x times, and reduces RPO to x minutes.
- Improve the TiCDC throughput of [replicating data to Kafka](/replicate-data-to-kafka.md) by x times and reduces replication latency to x seconds.
- Provide row-level [Time to live (TTL)](/time-to-live.md) to manage data lifecycle (experimental).
- TiCDC supports [replicating changed logs to object storage ](ticdc/ticdc-sink-to-cloud-storage.md) such as Amazon S3, Azure Blob Storage, and NFS (experimental).

## New features

### SQL

> * The performance of TiDB adding indexes is improved by 10 times [#35983](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/35983) @[benjamin2037](https://github.com/benjamin2037) @[tangenta](https://github.com/tangenta) **tw@Oreoxmt**

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
* The performance of TiDB adding indexes is improved by 10 times (GA) [#35983](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/35983) @[benjamin2037](https://github.com/benjamin2037) @[tangenta](https://github.com/tangenta) **tw@Oreoxmt**
```

    TiDB v6.3.0 introduces the [Add index acceleration](/system-variables.md#tidb_ddl_enable_fast_reorg-new-in-v630) as an experimental feature to improve the speed of backfilling when creating an index. In v6.5.0, this feature becomes GA and is enabled by default, and the performance on large tables is expected to be 10 times faster. The acceleration feature is suitable for scenarios where a single SQL statement adds an index serially. When multiple SQL statements add indexes in parallel, only one of the SQL statements will be accelerated.

> * Provide lightweight metadata lock to improve the DML success rate during DDL change [#37275](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/37275) @[wjhuang2016](https://github.com/wjhuang2016) **tw@Oreoxmt**

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
* Provide lightweight metadata lock to improve the DML success rate during DDL change (GA) [#37275](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/37275) @[wjhuang2016](https://github.com/wjhuang2016) **tw@Oreoxmt**
```

    TiDB v6.3.0 introduces [Metadata lock](/metadata-lock.md) as an experimental feature. To avoid the `Information schema is changed` error caused by DML statements, TiDB coordinates the priority of DMLs and DDLs during table metadata change, and makes the ongoing DDLs wait for the DMLs with old metadata to commit. In v6.5.0, this feature becomes GA and is enabled by default. It is suitable for various types of DDLs change scenarios.

    For more information, see [User document](/metadata-lock.md).

> * Support restoring a cluster to a specific point in time by using `FLASHBACK CLUSTER TO TIMESTAMP` [#37197](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/37197) [#13303](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/13303) @[Defined2014](https://github.com/Defined2014) @[bb7133](https://github.com/bb7133) @[JmPotato](https://github.com/JmPotato) @[Connor1996](https://github.com/Connor1996) @[HuSharp](https://github.com/HuSharp) @[CalvinNeo](https://github.com/CalvinNeo)  **tw@Oreoxmt**

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
* Support restoring a cluster to a specific point in time by using `FLASHBACK CLUSTER TO TIMESTAMP` (GA) [#37197](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/37197) [#13303](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/13303) @[Defined2014](https://github.com/Defined2014) @[bb7133](https://github.com/bb7133) @[JmPotato](https://github.com/JmPotato) @[Connor1996](https://github.com/Connor1996) @[HuSharp](https://github.com/HuSharp) @[CalvinNeo](https://github.com/CalvinNeo)  **tw@Oreoxmt**
```

    For more information, see [user document](/sql-statements/sql-statement-flashback-to-timestamp.md).

* Fully support non-transactional DML statements including `INSERT`, `REPLACE`, `UPDATE`, and `DELETE` [#33485](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/33485) @[ekexium](https://github.com/ekexium) **tw@Oreoxmt**

    In the scenarios of large data processing, a single SQL statement with a large transaction might have a negative impact on the cluster stability and performance. A non-transactional DML statement is a DML statement split into multiple SQL statements for internal execution. The split statements compromise transaction atomicity and isolation but greatly improve the cluster stability. TiDB supports non-transactional `DELETE` statements since v6.1.0, and supports non-transactional `INSERT`, `REPLACE`, and `UPDATE` statements since v6.5.0.

    For more information, see [Non-Transactional DML statements](/non-transactional-dml.md) and [`BATCH` syntax](/sql-statements/sql-statement-batch.md).

> * Support time to live (TTL) (experimental) [#39262](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/39262)  @[lcwangchao](https://github.com/lcwangchao) **tw@ran-huang**

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
* Support time to live (TTL) (experimental) [#39262](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/39262) @[lcwangchao](https://github.com/lcwangchao) **tw@ran-huang**
```

    For a SQL statement, due to various factors during execution, the optimizer might occasionally choose a new execution plan instead of its previous optimal execution plan, and the SQL performance is impacted. In this case, if the optimal execution plan has not been cleared yet, it still exists in the SQL execution history.

    In v6.5.0, TiDB supports binding historical execution plans by extending the binding object in the [`CREATE [GLOBAL | SESSION] BINDING`](/sql-statements/sql-statement-create-binding.md) statement. When the execution plan of a SQL statement changes, you can bind the original execution plan by specifying `plan_digest` in the `CREATE [GLOBAL | SESSION] BINDING` statement to quickly recover SQL performance, as long as the original execution plan is still in the SQL execution history memory table (for example, `statements_summary`). This feature can simplify the process of handling execution plan change issues and improve your maintenance efficiency.

    For more information, see [user documentation](/sql-plan-management.md#bind-historical-execution-plans).

> ### Security

Author: ```suggestion

### Security
```

>     For more information, see the [user documentation](/tiflash/tiflash-results-materialization.md).

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
  For more information, see the [user documentation](/tiflash/tiflash-results-materialization.md).
```

    For more information, see [User document](/password-management.md#failed-login-tracking-and-temporary-account-locking-policy).

### Observability

* TiDB Dashboard can be deployed on Kubernetes as an independent Pod [#1447](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb-dashboard/issues/1447) @[SabaPing](https://github.com/SabaPing) **tw@shichun-0415

    TiDB v6.5.0 (and later) and TiDB Operator v1.4.0 (and later) support deploying TiDB Dashboard as an independent Pod on Kubernetes. Using TiDB Operator, you can access the IP address of this Pod to start TiDB Dashboard.

    Independently deploying TiDB Dashboard provides the following benefits:

    - The compute work of TiDB Dashboard does not pose pressure on PD nodes. This ensures more stable cluster operation.
    - The user can still access TiDB Dashboard for diagnosis even if the PD node is unavailable.
    - Accessing TiDB Dashboard in Internet does not involve the privileged interfaces of PD. Therefore, the security risk of the cluster is mitigated.

>     For more information, see [Deploy TiDB Dashboard independently in TiDB Operator](https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb-in-kubernetes/dev/get-started#deploy-tidb-dashboard-independently).

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
  For more information, see [Deploy TiDB Dashboard independently in TiDB Operator](https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb-in-kubernetes/dev/get-started#deploy-tidb-dashboard-independently).
```

### Performance

> * [INDEX MERGE](/glossary.md#index-merge) supports conjunctive normal form (expressions connected by `AND`) [#39333](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/39333) @[guo-shaoge](https://github.com/guo-shaoge) @[time-and-fate](https://github.com/time-and-fate) @[hailanwhu](https://github.com/hailanwhu) **tw@TomShawn**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* [INDEX MERGE](/glossary.md#index-merge) supports expressions connected by `AND` [#39333](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/39333) @[guo-shaoge](https://github.com/guo-shaoge) @[time-and-fate](https://github.com/time-and-fate) @[hailanwhu](https://github.com/hailanwhu) **tw@TomShawn**
```

    Before v6.5.0, TiDB only supported using index merge for the filter conditions connected by `OR`. Starting from v6.5.0, TiDB has supported using index merge for filter conditions connected by `AND` in the `WHERE` clause. In this way, the index merge of TiDB can now cover more general combinations of query filter conditions and is no longer limited to union (`OR`) relationship. The current v6.5.0 version only supports index merge under `OR` conditions as automatically selected by the optimizer. To enable index merge for `AND` conditions, you need to use the [`USE_INDEX_MERGE`](/optimizer-hints.md#use_index_merget1_name-idx1_name--idx2_name-) hint.

    For more details about index merge, see [v5.4.0 Release Notes](/release-5.4.0#performance) and [Explain Index Merge](/explain-index-merge.md).

> * Support pushing down the following [JSON functions](/tiflash/tiflash-supported-pushdown-calculations.md) to TiFlash [#39458](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/39458) @[yibin87](https://github.com/yibin87) **tw@qiancai**

Author: ```suggestion
* Support pushing down the following JSON functions to TiFlash [#39458](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/39458) @[yibin87](https://github.com/yibin87) **tw@qiancai**
```

    * `->`
    * `->>`
    * `JSON_EXTRACT()`

>     The JSON format provides a flexible way for application data modeling. Therefore, more and more applications are using the JSON format for data exchange and data storage. By pushing down JSON functions to TiFlash, you can improve the efficiency of analyzing data in the JSON type and use TiDB for more real-time analytics scenarios.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
  The JSON format provides a flexible way for application data modeling. Therefore, more and more applications are using the JSON format for data exchange and data storage. By pushing down JSON functions to TiFlash, you can improve the efficiency of analyzing data in the JSON type and use TiDB for more real-time analytics scenarios.
```

> * Support pushing down the following [string functions](/tiflash/tiflash-supported-pushdown-calculations.md) to TiFlash [#6115](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflash/issues/6115) @[xzhangxian1008](https://github.com/xzhangxian1008) **tw@qiancai**

Author: ```suggestion
* Support pushing down the following string functions to TiFlash [#6115](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflash/issues/6115) @[xzhangxian1008](https://github.com/xzhangxian1008) **tw@qiancai**
```

    In some view access scenarios, you need to use optimizer hints to interfere with the execution plan of the query in the view to achieve the best performance. Since v6.5.0, TiDB supports adding global hints for the query blocks in the view, thus the hints defined in the query can be effective in the view. This feature provides a way to inject hints into complex SQL statements that contain nested views, enhances the execution plan control, and stabilizes the performance of complex statements. To use global hints, you need to [name the query blocks](/optimizer-hints.md#step-1-define-the-query-block-name-of-the-view-using-the-qb_name-hint) and [specify hint references](/optimizer-hints.md#step-2-add-the-target-hints).

    For more information, see [User document](/optimizer-hints.md#hints-that-take-effect-globally).

* Support pushing down sorting operations of [partitioned tables](/partitioned-table.md) to TiKV [#26166](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/26166) @[winoros](https://github.com/winoros) **tw@qiancai**

>    Although the [partitioned table](/partitioned-table.md) feature has been GA since v6.1.0, TiDB is continually improving its performance. In v6.5.0, TiDB supports pushing down sorting operations such as `ORDER BY` and `LIMIT` to TiKV for computation and filtering, which reduces network I/O overhead and improves SQL performance when you use partitioned tables.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
    Although the [partitioned table](/partitioned-table.md) feature has been GA since v6.1.0, TiDB is continually improving its performance. In v6.5.0, TiDB supports pushing down sorting operations such as `ORDER BY` and `LIMIT` to TiKV for computation and filtering, which reduces network I/O overhead and improves SQL performance when you use partitioned tables.
```

    The `EXPLAIN ANALYZE` statement is used to print execution plans and runtime statistics. In v6.5.0, TiFlash has refined the execution information of the `TableFullScan` operator by adding the DMFile-related execution information. Now the TiFlash data scan status information is presented more intuitively, which helps you analyze TiFlash performance more easily.

    For more information, see [user documentation](sql-statements/sql-statement-explain-analyze.md).

* Support the output of execution plans in the JSON format [#39261](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/39261) @[fzzf678](https://github.com/fzzf678) **tw@ran-huang**

    In v6.5.0, TiDB extends the output format of execution plans. By using `EXPLAIN FORMAT=tidb_json <SQL_statement>`, you can output SQL execution plans in the JSON format. With this capability, SQL debugging tools and diagnostic tools can read execution plans more conveniently and accurately, thus improving the ease of use of SQL diagnosis and tuning.

    For more information, see [user document](/sql-statements/sql-statement-explain.md).

### MySQL compatibility

> * Support a high-performance and globally monotonic `AUTO_INCREMENT` [#38442](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/38442) @[tiancaiamao](https://github.com/tiancaiamao) **tw@Oreoxmt**

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
* Support a high-performance and globally monotonic `AUTO_INCREMENT` (GA) [#38442](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/38442) @[tiancaiamao](https://github.com/tiancaiamao) **tw@Oreoxmt**
```

    For more information, see [User document](/dm/dm-continuous-data-validation.md).

### TiDB data share subscription

* TiCDC supports replicating changed logs to storage sinks (experimental) [tiflow#6797](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/6797) @[zhaoxinyu](https://github.com/zhaoxinyu) **tw@shichun-0415**

     TiCDC supports replicating changed logs to Amazon S3, Azure Blob Storage, NFS, and other S3-compatible storage services. Cloud storage is reasonably priced and easy to use. If you do not want to use Kafka, you can use storage sinks. TiCDC saves the changed logs to a file and then sends it to the storage system. From the storage system, the consumer program reads the newly generated changed log files periodically.

    The storage sink supports changed logs in the canal-json and CSV formats. Noticeably, the latency of replicating changed logs from TiCDC to storage can be as short as xx. For more information, see [User document](/ticdc/ticdc-sink-to-cloud-storage.md).

> * TiCDC supports bidirectional replication across multiple clusters  @[asddongmen](https://github.com/asddongmen) **tw@shichun-0415**

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
* TiCDC supports bidirectional replication across multiple clusters @[asddongmen](https://github.com/asddongmen) **tw@shichun-0415**
```

### Backup and restore

* TiDB Backup & Restore supports snapshot checkpoint backup [#38647](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/38647) @[Leavrth](https://github.com/Leavrth) **tw@shichun-0415

    TiDB snapshot backup supports resuming backup from a checkpoint. When Backup & Restore (BR) encounters a recoverable error, it retries backup. However, BR exits if the retry fails for several times. The checkpoint backup feature allows for longer recoverable failures to be retried, for example, a network failure of tens of minutes.

    Note that if you do not recover the system from a failure within one hour after BR exits, the snapshot data to be backed up might be recycled by the GC mechanism, causing the backup to fail. For more information, see [User document](/br/br-checkpoint.md).

* PITR performance improved remarkably **tw@shichun-0415

>   In the log restore stage, the restore speed of one TiKV can reach xx MB/s, which is x times faster than before. The restore speed is scalable and the RTO in DR scenarios is reduced greatly. The RPO in DR scenarios can be as short as 5 minutes. In normal cluster operation and maintenance (OM), for example, a rolling upgrade is performed or only one TiKV is down, the RPO can be 5 minutes.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
    In the log restore stage, the restore speed of one TiKV can reach xx MB/s, which is x times faster than before. The restore speed is scalable and the RTO in DR scenarios is reduced greatly. The RPO in DR scenarios can be as short as 5 minutes. In normal cluster operation and maintenance (OM), for example, a rolling upgrade is performed or only one TiKV is down, the RPO can be 5 minutes.
```

    - Fix the issue that TiDB generates an unexpected execution plan for the `BEGIN; SELECT... FOR UPDATE;` point query when TiKV is not configured as a read engine [#39344](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/39344) @[Yisaer](https://github.com/Yisaer)
    - Fix the issue that mistakenly pushing down `StreamAgg` to TiFlash causes wrong results [#39266](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/39266) @[fixdb](https://github.com/fixdb)

+ TiKV

    - Fix an error in Raft Engine ctl [#11119](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/11119) @[tabokie](https://github.com/tabokie)
    - Fix the `Get raft db is not allowed` error when executing the `compact raft` command in tikv-ctl [#13515](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/13515) @[guoxiangCN](https://github.com/guoxiangCN)
    - Fix the issue that log backup does not work when TLS is enabled [#13867](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/13867) @[YuJuncen](https://github.com/YuJuncen)
    - Fix the support issue of the Geometry field type [#13651](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/13651) @[dveeden](https://github.com/dveeden)

>     - Fix the issue that  `_` in the `LIKE` operator cannot match non-ASCII characters when new collation is not enabled [#13769](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/13769) @[YangKeao](https://github.com/YangKeao)

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
    - Fix the issue that `_` in the `LIKE` operator cannot match non-ASCII characters when new collation is not enabled [#13769](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/13769) @[YangKeao](https://github.com/YangKeao)
```

    - Fix the issue that tikv-ctl is terminated unexpectedly when executing the `reset-to-version` command [#13829](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/13829) @[tabokie](https://github.com/tabokie)

+ PD

>     - Fix the issue that the `balance-hot-region-scheduler` configuration is not persisted if not modified [#5701](https://github.com/tikv/pd/issues/5701)  @[HunDunDM](https://github.com/HunDunDM)

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
    - Fix the issue that the `balance-hot-region-scheduler` configuration is not persisted if not modified [#5701](https://github.com/tikv/pd/issues/5701) @[HunDunDM](https://github.com/HunDunDM)
```

    - Fix the issue that `rank-formula-version` does not retain the pre-upgrade configuration during the upgrade process [#5698](https://github.com/tikv/pd/issues/5698) @[HunDunDM](https://github.com/HunDunDM)

+ TiFlash

    - Fix the issue that column files in the delta layer cannot be compacted after restarting TiFlash [#6159](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflash/issues/6159) @[lidezhu](https://github.com/lidezhu)
    - Fix the issue that TiFlash File Open OPS is too high [#6345](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflash/issues/6345) @[JaySon-Huang](https://github.com/JaySon-Huang)

+ Tools

    + Backup & Restore (BR)

>         - Fix the issue that when BR deletes log backup data, it mistakenly deletes data that should not be deleted  [#38939](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/38939) @[Leavrth](https://github.com/Leavrth)

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
        - Fix the issue that when BR deletes log backup data, it mistakenly deletes data that should not be deleted [#38939](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/38939) @[Leavrth](https://github.com/Leavrth)
```

---

# TiDB 6.5.0 Release Notes

Release date: xx xx, 2022

TiDB version: 6.5.0

Quick access: [Quick start](https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/v6.5/quick-start-with-tidb) | [Production deployment](https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/v6.5/production-deployment-using-tiup) | [Installation packages](https://www.pingcap.com/download/?version=v6.5.0#version-list)

TiDB 6.5.0 is a Long-Term Support Release (LTS).

相比于前一个 LTS (即 6.1.0 版本)，6.5.0 版本包含 [6.2.0-DMR](/releases/release-6.2.0.md)、[6.3.0-DMR](/releases/release-6.3.0.md)、[6.4.0-DMR](/releases/release-6.4.0.md) 中已发布的新功能、提升改进和错误修复，并引入了以下关键特性：

- 优化器代价模型 V2 GA
- TiDB 全局内存控制 GA
- 全局 hint 干预视图内查询的计划生成
- 满足密码合规审计需求 [密码管理](/password-management.md)
- TiDB 添加索引的速度提升为原来的 10 倍
- Flashback Cluster 功能兼容 TiCDC 和 PiTR
- 支持通过 `INSERT INTO SELECT` 语句[保存 TiFlash 查询结果](/tiflash/tiflash-results-materialization.md)（实验特性）
- 支持下推 JSON 抽取函数下推至 TiFlash
- 进一步增强索引合并[INDEX MERGE](/glossary.md#index-merge)功能

## New features

### SQL

* The performance of TiDB adding indexes is improved by 10 times [#35983](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/35983) @[benjamin2037](https://github.com/benjamin2037) @[tangenta](https://github.com/tangenta) **tw@Oreoxmt**

>     TiDB v6.3.0 introduces the [Add index acceleration](/system-variables.md#tidb_ddl_enable_fast_reorg-new-in-v630) as an experimental feature to improve the speed of backfilling when creating an index. In v6.5.0, this feature becomes GA and is enabled by default and the performance improvement is expected to be 10 times faster than before. The acceleration feature is suitable for scenarios where a single SQL statement adds an index serially. When multiple SQL statements add indexes in parallel, only one of the SQL statements will be accelerated.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    TiDB v6.3.0 introduces the [Add index acceleration](/system-variables.md#tidb_ddl_enable_fast_reorg-new-in-v630) as an experimental feature to improve the speed of backfilling when creating an index. In v6.5.0, this feature becomes GA and is enabled by default, and the performance on large tables is expected to be 10 times faster. The acceleration feature is suitable for scenarios where a single SQL statement adds an index serially. When multiple SQL statements add indexes in parallel, only one of the SQL statements will be accelerated.
```

* Provide lightweight metadata lock to improve the DML success rate during DDL change [#37275](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/37275) @[wjhuang2016](https://github.com/wjhuang2016) **tw@Oreoxmt**

>     TiDB v6.3.0 introduces [Metadata lock](/metadata-lock.md) as an experimental feature. To avoid the `Information schema is changed` error caused by DML statements, TiDB coordinates the priority of DMLs and DDLs during table metadata change, and makes executing DDLs wait for the DMLs with old metadata to commit. In v6.5.0, this feature becomes GA and is enabled by default. It is suitable for all types of DDLs change scenarios.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    TiDB v6.3.0 introduces [Metadata lock](/metadata-lock.md) as an experimental feature. To avoid the `Information schema is changed` error caused by DML statements, TiDB coordinates the priority of DMLs and DDLs during table metadata change, and makes the ongoing DDLs wait for the DMLs with old metadata to commit. In v6.5.0, this feature becomes GA and is enabled by default. It is suitable for various types of DDLs change scenarios.
```

    For more information, see [User document](/metadata-lock.md).

* Support restoring a cluster to a specific point in time by using `FLASHBACK CLUSTER TO TIMESTAMP` [#37197](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/37197) [#13303](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/13303) @[Defined2014](https://github.com/Defined2014) @[bb7133](https://github.com/bb7133) @[JmPotato](https://github.com/JmPotato) @[Connor1996](https://github.com/Connor1996) @[HuSharp](https://github.com/HuSharp) @[CalvinNeo](https://github.com/CalvinNeo)  **tw@Oreoxmt**

>     TiDB v6.4.0 introduces the [`FLASHBACK CLUSTER TO TIMESTAMP`](/sql-statements/sql-statement-flashback-to-timestamp.md) statement as an experimental feature. You can use this statement to restore a cluster to a specific point in time within the Garbage Collection (GC) life time. In v6.5.0, this statement becomes GA. This feature helps you to easily undo DML misoperations, restore the original cluster in minutes, rollback data at different time points to determine the exact time when data changes, and it is compatible with PITR and TiCDC.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    TiDB v6.4.0 introduces the [`FLASHBACK CLUSTER TO TIMESTAMP`](/sql-statements/sql-statement-flashback-to-timestamp.md) statement as an experimental feature. You can use this statement to restore a cluster to a specific point in time within the Garbage Collection (GC) life time. In v6.5.0, this statement becomes GA. This feature helps you to easily undo DML misoperations, restore the original cluster in minutes, roll back data at different time points to determine the exact time when data changes, and it is compatible with PITR and TiCDC.
```

>     For more information, see [User document](/sql-statements/sql-statement-flashback-to-timestamp.md).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    For more information, see [user document](/sql-statements/sql-statement-flashback-to-timestamp.md).
```

* Fully support non-transactional DML statements including `INSERT`, `REPLACE`, `UPDATE`, and `DELETE` [#33485](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/33485) @[ekexium](https://github.com/ekexium) **tw@Oreoxmt**

>     In the scenarios of large data processing, a single SQL statement with a large transaction might have a negative impact on the cluster stability and performance. A non-transactional DML statement is a DML statement split into multiple SQL statements for internal execution. The split statements compromise transaction atomicity and isolation but greatly improve the cluster stability. TiDB supports non-transactional `DELETE` statements since v6.1.0, and v6.5.0 adds support for non-transactional `INSERT`, `REPLACE`, and `UPDATE` statements.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    In the scenarios of large data processing, a single SQL statement with a large transaction might have a negative impact on the cluster stability and performance. A non-transactional DML statement is a DML statement split into multiple SQL statements for internal execution. The split statements compromise transaction atomicity and isolation but greatly improve the cluster stability. TiDB supports non-transactional `DELETE` statements since v6.1.0, and supports non-transactional `INSERT`, `REPLACE`, and `UPDATE` statements since v6.5.0.
```

    In v6.5.0, TiDB supports binding historical execution plans by extending the binding object in the [`CREATE [GLOBAL | SESSION] BINDING`](/sql-statements/sql-statement-create-binding.md) statement. When the execution plan of a SQL statement changes, you can bind the original execution plan by specifying `plan_digest` in the `CREATE [GLOBAL | SESSION] BINDING` statement to quickly recover SQL performance, as long as the original execution plan is still in the SQL execution history memory table (for example, `statements_summary`). This feature can simplify the process of handling execution plan change issues and improve your maintenance efficiency.

    For more information, see [user documentation](/sql-plan-management.md#bind-historical-execution-plans).

### Security

* Support the password complexity policy [#38928](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/38928) @[CbcWestwolf](https://github.com/CbcWestwolf) **tw@ran-huang**

>     After you enable the password complexity policy for TiDB, when you set a password, TiDB checks the password length, the number of uppercase and lowercase letters, numbers, and special characters, whether the password matches the dictionary, and whether the password matches the username. This ensures that you set a secure password.

Author: ```suggestion
    After this policy is enabled, when you set a password, TiDB checks the password length, whether uppercase and lowercase letters, numbers, and special characters in the password are sufficient, whether the password matches the dictionary, and whether the password matches the username. This ensures that you set a secure password.
```

    TiDB provides the SQL function [`VALIDATE_PASSWORD_STRENGTH()`](https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/5.7/en/encryption-functions.html#function_validate-password-strength) to validate the password strength.

>     For more information, refer to [user document](/password-management.md#password-complexity-policy).

Author: ```suggestion
    For more information, see [User document](/password-management.md#password-complexity-policy).
```

* Support the password expiration policy [#38936](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/38936) @[CbcWestwolf](https://github.com/CbcWestwolf) **tw@ran-huang**

>     TiDB supports the password expiration policy, including manual expiration, global-level automatic expiration, and account-level automatic expiration. After this policy is enabled, you must change your passwords periodically. This reduces the risk of password leakage due to long-term use and improve password security.

Author: ```suggestion
    TiDB supports configuring the password expiration policy, including manual expiration, global-level automatic expiration, and account-level automatic expiration. After this policy is enabled, you must change your passwords periodically. This reduces the risk of password leakage due to long-term use and improves password security.
```

>     For more information, refer to [user document](/password-management.md#password-expiration-policy).

Author: ```suggestion
    For more information, see [User document](/password-management.md#password-expiration-policy).
```

* Support the password reuse policy [#38937](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/38937) @[keeplearning20221](https://github.com/keeplearning20221) **tw@ran-huang**

>     TiDB supports the password reuse policy, including global-level password reuse policy and account-level password reuse policy. After this policy is enabled, you cannot use the passwords that you have used within a period or the most recent several passwords that you have used. This reduces the risk of password leakage due to repeated use of passwords and improves password security.

Author: ```suggestion
    TiDB supports configuring the password reuse policy, including global-level password reuse policy and account-level password reuse policy. After this policy is enabled, you cannot use the passwords that you have used within a specified period or the most recent several passwords that you have used. This reduces the risk of password leakage due to repeated use of passwords and improves password security.
```

>     For more information, refer to [user document](/password-management.md#password-reuse-policy).

Author: ```suggestion
    For more information, see [User document](/password-management.md#password-reuse-policy).
```

* Support failed-login tracking and temporary account locking policy [#38938](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/38938) @[lastincisor](https://github.com/lastincisor) **tw@ran-huang**

    After this policy is enabled, if you log in to TiDB with incorrect passwords multiple times consecutively, the account is temporarily locked. After the lock time ends, the account is automatically unlocked.

>     For more information, refer to [user document](/password-management.md#failed-login-tracking-and-temporary-account-locking-policy).

Author: ```suggestion
    For more information, see [User document](/password-management.md#failed-login-tracking-and-temporary-account-locking-policy).
```

    Before v6.5.0, TiDB only supported using index merge for the filter conditions connected by `OR`. Starting from v6.5.0, TiDB has supported using index merge for filter conditions connected by`AND` in the `WHERE` clause. In this way, the index merge of TiDB can now cover more general combinations of query filter conditions and is no longer limited to Union (`OR`) relationship. The current v6.5.0 version only supports index merge under `OR` conditions as automatically selected by the optimizer. To enable index merge for `AND` conditions, you need to use the [`USE_INDEX_MERGE`](/optimizer-hints.md#use_index_merget1_name-idx1_name--idx2_name-) hint.

    For more details about index merge, see [v5.4 release notes](/release-5.4.0#performance) and [Explain Index Merge](/explain-index-merge.md).

* Support pushing down the following [JSON functions](/tiflash/tiflash-supported-pushdown-calculations.md) to TiFlash [#39458](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/39458) @[yibin87](https://github.com/yibin87) **tw@qiancai**

    * `->`
    * `->>`
    * `JSON_EXTRACT()`

>     The JSON format provides a flexible way to model application design. Therefore, more and more applications are using the JSON format for data exchange and data storage. By pushing down JSON functions to TiFlash, you can improve the efficiency of analyzing data in the JSON type and use TiDB for more real-time analytics scenarios.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    The JSON format provides a flexible way for application data modeling. Therefore, more and more applications are using the JSON format for data exchange and data storage. By pushing down JSON functions to TiFlash, you can improve the efficiency of analyzing data in the JSON type and use TiDB for more real-time analytics scenarios.
```

* Support pushing down the following [string functions](/tiflash/tiflash-supported-pushdown-calculations.md) to TiFlash [#6115](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflash/issues/6115) @[xzhangxian1008](https://github.com/xzhangxian1008) **tw@qiancai**

    * `regexp_like`
    * `regexp_instr`
    * `regexp_substr`

> * Support the global Hint to interfere with the execution plan generation in [Views](/views.md) [#37887](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/37887) @[Reminiscent](https://github.com/Reminiscent) **tw@Oreoxmt**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Support the global optimizer hint to interfere with the execution plan generation in [Views](/views.md) [#37887](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/37887) @[Reminiscent](https://github.com/Reminiscent) **tw@Oreoxmt**
```

>     In some view access scenarios, you need to use Hints to interfere with the execution plan of the query in the view to achieve best performances. In v6.5.0, TiDB supports adding global Hints for the query blocks in the view, thus the Hints defined in the query can be effective in the view. This feature provides a way to inject Hints into complex SQL statements that contain nested views, enhances the execution plan control, and stabilizes the performance of complex statements. To use global Hints, you need to [name the query blocks](/optimizer-hints.md#step-1-define-the-query-block-name-of-the-view-using-the-qb_name-hint) and [specify Hint references](/optimizer-hints.md#step-2-add-the-target-hints).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    In some view access scenarios, you need to use optimizer hints to interfere with the execution plan of the query in the view to achieve the best performance. Since v6.5.0, TiDB supports adding global hints for the query blocks in the view, thus the hints defined in the query can be effective in the view. This feature provides a way to inject hints into complex SQL statements that contain nested views, enhances the execution plan control, and stabilizes the performance of complex statements. To use global hints, you need to [name the query blocks](/optimizer-hints.md#step-1-define-the-query-block-name-of-the-view-using-the-qb_name-hint) and [specify hint references](/optimizer-hints.md#step-2-add-the-target-hints).
```

    For more information, see [User document](/optimizer-hints.md#hints-that-take-effect-globally).

> * Support pushing down sorting operations of [partitioned-table](/partitioned-table.md) to TiKV [#26166](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/26166) @[winoros](https://github.com/winoros) **tw@qiancai**

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* Support pushing down sorting operations of the [partitioned table](/partitioned-table.md) to TiKV [#26166](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/26166) @[winoros](https://github.com/winoros) **tw@qiancai**
```

>    Although [partitioned table](/partitioned-table.md) has been GA since v6.1.0, TiDB is continually improving its performance. In v6.5.0, TiDB supports pushing down sort operations such as `ORDER BY` and `LIMIT` to TiKV for computation and filtering, which reduces network I/O overhead and improves SQL performance when you use partitioned tables.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
   Although the [partitioned table](/partitioned-table.md) has been GA since v6.1.0, TiDB is continually improving its performance. In v6.5.0, TiDB supports pushing down sorting operations such as `ORDER BY` and `LIMIT` to TiKV for computation and filtering, which reduces network I/O overhead and improves SQL performance when you use partitioned tables.
```

* Optimizer introduces a more accurate Cost Model Version 2 [#35240](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/35240) @[qw4990](https://github.com/qw4990) **tw@Oreoxmt**

>     TiDB v6.2.0 introduces the [Cost Model Version 2](/cost-model.md#cost-model-version-2) as an experimental feature. This model uses a more accurate cost estimation method to help the optimizer choose the optimal execution plan. Especially when TiFlash is deployed, Cost Model Version 2 automatically chooses the appropriate storage engine and avoids manual intervention. After real scene testing for a period of time, this model becomes GA in v6.5.0. The newly created cluster uses Cost Model Version 2 by default. For clusters upgrade to v6.5.0, because Cost Model Version 2 might cause changes to query plans, you can set the [`tidb_cost_model_version = 2`](/system-variables.md#tidb_cost_model_version-new-in-v620) variable to use the new cost model after sufficient performance testing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    TiDB v6.2.0 introduces the [Cost Model Version 2](/cost-model.md#cost-model-version-2) as an experimental feature. This model uses a more accurate cost estimation method to help the optimizer choose the optimal execution plan. Especially when TiFlash is deployed, Cost Model Version 2 automatically helps choose the appropriate storage engine and avoids much manual intervention. After real-scene testing for a period of time, this model becomes GA in v6.5.0. SInce v6.5.0, newly-created clusters use Cost Model Version 2 by default. For clusters upgrade to v6.5.0, because Cost Model Version 2 might cause changes to query plans, you can set the [`tidb_cost_model_version = 2`](/system-variables.md#tidb_cost_model_version-new-in-v620) variable to use the new cost model after sufficient performance testing.
```

>     Cost Model Version 2 becomes a generally available feature that significantly improves the overall capability of the TiDB optimizer and evolves towards a more powerful HTAP database.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Cost Model Version 2 becomes a generally available feature that significantly improves the overall capability of the TiDB optimizer and helps TiDB evolve towards a more powerful HTAP database.
```

    对于运行 v6.5.0 及以上版本的客户，建议移除配置项 [`txn-total-size-limit`](/tidb-configuration-file.md#txn-total-size-limit)，取消对事务内存做单独的限制，转而由系统变量 [`tidb_mem_quota_query`](/system-variables.md#tidbmemquotaquery) 和 [`tidb_server_memory_limit`](/system-variables.md#tidb_server_memory_limit-从-v640-版本开始引入) 对全局内存进行管理，从而提高内存的使用效率。

    更多信息，请参考[用户文档](/configure-memory-usage.md)。

### Ease of use

* Refine the execution information of the TiFlash `TableFullScan` operator in the `EXPLAIN ANALYZE` output   [#5926](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflash/issues/5926) @[hongyunyan](https://github.com/hongyunyan) **tw@qiancai**

    The `EXPLAIN ANALYZE` statement is used to print execution plans and runtime statistics. In v6.5.0, TiFlash has refined the execution information of the `TableFullScan` operator by adding the DMFile-related execution information. Now the TiFlash data scan status information is presented more intuitively, which helps you analyze TiFlash performance more easily.

    For more information, see [user documentation](sql-statements/sql-statement-explain-analyze.md).

> * Support the output of execution plans in JSON format [#39261](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/39261) @[fzzf678](https://github.com/fzzf678) **tw@ran-huang**

Author: ```suggestion
* Support the output of execution plans in the JSON format [#39261](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/39261) @[fzzf678](https://github.com/fzzf678) **tw@ran-huang**
```

>     In v6.5, TiDB extends the output format of the execution plan. By using `EXPLAIN FORMAT=tidb_json <SQL_statement>`, you can output the SQL execution plan in JSON format. With this capability, SQL debugging tools and diagnostic tools can read the execution plan more conveniently and accurately, thus improving the ease of use of SQL diagnosis and tuning.

Author: ```suggestion
    In v6.5.0, TiDB extends the output format of execution plans. By using `EXPLAIN FORMAT=tidb_json <SQL_statement>`, you can output SQL execution plans in the JSON format. With this capability, SQL debugging tools and diagnostic tools can read execution plans more conveniently and accurately, thus improving the ease of use of SQL diagnosis and tuning.
```

> * Refine the execution information of the TiFlash `TableFullScan` operator in the `EXPLAIN ANALYZE` output   [#5926](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflash/issues/5926) @[hongyunyan](https://github.com/hongyunyan) **tw@qiancai**

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* Refine the execution information of the TiFlash `TableFullScan` operator in the `EXPLAIN ANALYZE` output [#5926](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflash/issues/5926) @[hongyunyan](https://github.com/hongyunyan) **tw@qiancai**
```

    For more information, see [user document](/sql-statements/sql-statement-explain.md).

### MySQL compatibility

* Support a high-performance and globally monotonic `AUTO_INCREMENT` [#38442](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/38442) @[tiancaiamao](https://github.com/tiancaiamao) **tw@Oreoxmt**

    TiDB v6.4.0 introduces the `AUTO_INCREMENT` MySQL compatibility mode as an experimental feature. This mode introduces a centralized auto-increment ID allocating service that ensures IDs monotonically increase on all TiDB instances. This feature makes it easier to sort query results by auto-increment IDs. In v6.5.0, this feature becomes GA. The insert TPS of a table using this feature is expected to exceed 20,000, and this feature supports elastic scaling to improve the write throughput of a single table and entire clusters. To use the MySQL compatibility mode, you need to set `AUTO_ID_CACHE` to `1` when creating a table. The following is an example:

    ```sql
    CREATE TABLE t(a int AUTO_INCREMENT key) AUTO_ID_CACHE 1;
    ```

>     For more information, see [User document](/auto-increment.md#mysql-compatibility-mode).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    For more information, see [user document](/auto-increment.md#mysql-compatibility-mode).
```

    Previously, you needed to interrupt the business to do the full data verification, which would affect your business. Now, with this feature, you can perform incremental data verification without interrupting the business.

    For more information, see [User document](/dm/dm-continuous-data-validation.md).

### TiDB data share subscription

* TiCDC 支持输出 storage sink [tiflow#6797](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/6797) @[zhaoxinyu](https://github.com/zhaoxinyu) **tw@shichun-0415**

    TiCDC 支持将 changed log 输出到 S3/Azure Blob Storage/NFS，以及兼容 S3 协议的存储服务中。Cloud Storage 价格便宜，使用方便。对于不希望使用 Kafka 的用户，可以选择使用 storage sink。 TiCDC 将 changed log 保存到文件，然后发送到 storage 中；消费程序定时从 storage 读取新产生的 changed log files 进行处理。

    Storage sink 支持 changed log 格式位 canal-json/csv，此外 changed log 从 TiCDC 同步到 storage 的延迟可以达到 xx，支持更多信息，请参考[用户文档](https://github.com/pingcap/docs-cn/pull/12151/files)。

> * TiCDC 支持两个或者多个 TiDB 集群之间相互复制 @[asddongmen](https://github.com/asddongmen) **tw@shichun-0415**
> 
>     TiCDC 支持在多个 TiDB 集群之间进行双向复制。 如果业务上需要 TiDB 多活，尤其是异地多活的场景，可以使用该功能作为 TiDB 多活的解决方案。只要为每个 TiDB 集群到其他 TiDB 集群的 TiCDC changefeed 同步任务配置 `bdr-mode = true` 参数，就可以实现多个 TIDB 集群之间的数据相互复制。更多信息，请参考[用户文档](/ticdc/ticdc/ticdc-bidirectional-replication.md).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* TiCDC supports bidirectional replication across multiple clusters  @[asddongmen](https://github.com/asddongmen) **tw@shichun-0415**

    TiCDC supports bidirectional replication across multiple TiDB clusters. If you need a multi-master TiDB solution for your application, especially a multi-master solution in multiple regions, you can use this feature to build one. By configuring the `bdr-mode = true` parameter for the TiCDC changefeeds from each TiDB cluster to other TiDB clusters, you can achieve bidirectional data replication across multiple TiDB clusters.

    For more information, refer to [user document](/ticdc/ticdc-bidirectional-replication.md).
```

| [`validate_password.special_char_count`](/system-variables.md#validate_passwordspecial_char_count-new-in-v650) | Newly added | A check item in the password complexity check. It checks whether the password contains sufficient special characters. This variable takes effect only when [`validate_password.enable`](/system-variables.md#password_reuse_interval-new-in-v650) is enabled and [`validate_password.policy`](/system-variables.md#validate_passwordpolicy-new-in-v650) is set to `1` (MEDIUM) or larger. The default value is `1`. |
|        |                              |      |
|        |                              |      |

### Configuration file parameters

| 配置文件 | 配置项 | 修改类型 | 描述 |
| -------- | -------- | -------- | -------- |
| TiDB | [`disconnect-on-expired-password`](/tidb-configuration-file.md#disconnect-on-expired-password-new-in-v650) | Newly added | Determines whether TiDB disconnects the client connection when the password is expired. The default value is `true`, which means the client connection is disconnected when the password is expired. |

> | TiDB | [`server-memory-quota`](/tidb-configuration-file.md#server-memory-quota-从-v409-版本开始引入) | 废弃 | 自 v6.5.0 起，该配置项被废弃。请使用 [`tidb_server_memory_limit`](/system-variables.md#tidb_server_memory_limit-从-v640-版本开始引入) 系统变量进行设置。 |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| TiDB | [`server-memory-quota`](/tidb-configuration-file.md#server-memory-quota-new-in-v409) | Deprecated | Since v6.5.0, this configuration item is deprecated. Instead, use the system variable [`tidb_server_memory_limit`](/system-variables.md#tidb_server_memory_limit-new-in-v640) for setting.  |
```

| TiKV | [`cdc.min-ts-interval`](/tikv-configuration-file.md#min-ts-interval) | 修改 | 默认值从 `1s` 修改为 `200ms` |
|          |          |          |          |
|          |          |          |          |

### Others

## 废弃功能

即将于 v6.6.0 版本废弃 v4.0.7 版本引入的 Amending Transaction 机制，并使用[元数据锁](/metadata-lock.md) 替代。

## Improvements

+ TiDB

    - For `BIT` and `CHAR` columns, make the result of `INFORMATION_SCHEMA.COLUMNS` consistent with MySQL [#25472](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/25472) @[hawkingrei](https://github.com/hawkingrei)

+ TiKV

>     - The default value of `cdc.min-ts-interval` has been changed from `1s` to `200ms` to reduce CDC latency [#12840](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/12840) @[hicqu](https://github.com/hicqu)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

    - Stop writing to Raft Engine when there is insufficient space to avoid exhausting disk space [#13642](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/13642) @[jiayang-zheng](https://github.com/jiayang-zheng)
    - Support pushing down the `json_valid` function to TiKV [#13571](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/13571) @[lizhenhuan](https://github.com/lizhenhuan)
    - Support backing up multiple ranges of data in a single backup request [#13701](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/13701) @[Leavrth](https://github.com/Leavrth)
    - Support backing up data to the Asia Pacific region (ap-southeast-3) of AWS by updating the rusoto library [#13751](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/13751) @[3pointer](https://github.com/3pointer)
    - Reduce pessimistic transaction conflicts [#13298](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/13298) @[MyonKeminta](https://github.com/MyonKeminta)
    - Improve recovery performance by caching external storage objects [#13798](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/13798) @[YuJuncen](https://github.com/YuJuncen)

>     - The CheckLeader is run in a dedicated thread to reduce TiCDC replication latency [#13774](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/13774) @[overvenus](https://github.com/overvenus)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Run the CheckLeader in a dedicated thread to reduce TiCDC replication latency [#13774](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/13774) @[overvenus](https://github.com/overvenus)
```

    + TiDB Data Migration (DM)

        - Improve the data replication performance for DM by not parsing the data of tables in the block list [#4287](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/4287) @[GMHDBJD](https://github.com/GMHDBJD)
        - Improve the write efficiency of DM relay by using asynchronous write and batch write [#4287](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/4287) @[GMHDBJD](https://github.com/GMHDBJD)
        - Optimize the error messages in DM precheck [#7621](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/7621) @[buchuitoudegou](https://github.com/buchuitoudegou)
        - Improve the compatibility of `SHOW SLAVE HOSTS` for old MySQL versions [#5017](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/5017) @[lyzx2001](https://github.com/lyzx2001)

## Bug fixes

+ TiDB

    - 修复 chunk reuse 功能部分情况下内存 chunk 被错误使用的问题 [#38917](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/38917) @[keeplearning20221](https://github.com/keeplearning20221)

>     - 修复 `tidb_constraint_check_in_place_pessimistic` 可能被全局设置影响内部 session 的问题 [#38766](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/38766) @[ekexium](https://github.com/ekexium)
>     - 修复了 AUTO_INCREMENT 列无法和 Check 约束一起使用的问题 [#38894](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/38894) @[YangKeao](https://github.com/YangKeao)
>     - 修复使用 'insert ignore into' 往 smallint 类型 auto increment 的列插入 string 类型数据会报错的问题 [#38483](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/38483) @[hawkingrei](https://github.com/hawkingrei)
>     - 修复了重命名分区表的分区列操作出现空指针报错的问题 [#38932](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/38932) @[mjonss](https://github.com/mjonss)
>     - 修复了一个修改分区表的分区列导致 DDL 卡死的问题 [#38530](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/38530) @[mjonss](https://github.com/mjonss)
>     - 修复了从 v4.0 升级到 v6.4 后 'admin show job' 操作崩溃的问题 [#38980](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/38980) @[tangenta](https://github.com/tangenta)
>     - 修复了 `tidb_decode_key` 函数未正确处理分区表编码的问题 [#39304](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/39304) @[Defined2014](https://github.com/Defined2014)
>     - 修复了 log rotate 时，grpc 的错误日志信息未被重定向到正确的日志文件的问题 [#38941](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/38941) @[xhebox](https://github.com/xhebox)
>     - 修复了 `begin; select... for update;` 点查在 read engines 未配置 TiKV 时生成非预期执行计划的问题 [#39344](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/39344) @[Yisaer](https://github.com/Yisaer)
>     - 修复了错误地下推 `StreamAgg` 到 TiFlash 导致结果错误的问题 [#39266](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/39266) @[fixdb](https://github.com/fixdb)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Fix the issue that the internal sessions of `tidb_constraint_check_in_place_pessimistic` might be affected by the global setting [#38766](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/38766) @[ekexium](https://github.com/ekexium)
    - Fix the issue that the `AUTO_INCREMENT` column cannot be used together with the `Check` constraint [#38894](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/38894) @[YangKeao](https://github.com/YangKeao)
    - Fix the issue that using `INSERT IGNORE INTO` to insert data of the `STRING` type into an auto-increment column of the `SMALLINT` type will raise an error [#38483](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/38483) @[hawkingrei](https://github.com/hawkingrei)
    - Fix the issue that the null pointer error occurs in the operation of renaming the partition column of a partitioned table [#38932](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/38932) @[mjonss](https://github.com/mjonss)
    - Fix the issue that modifying the partition column of a partitioned table causes DDL to hang [#38530](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/38530) @[mjonss](https://github.com/mjonss)
    - Fix the issue that the `ADMIN SHOW JOB` operation panics after upgrading from v4.0 to v6.4 [#38980](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/38980) @[tangenta](https://github.com/tangenta)
    - Fix the issue that the `tidb_decode_key` function fails to correctly parse the encoding of partitioned tables [#39304](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/39304) @[Defined2014](https://github.com/Defined2014)
    - Fixe the issue that gRPC error log messages are not redirected to the correct log file during log rotation [#38941](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/38941) @[xhebox](https://github.com/xhebox)
    - Fix the issue that TiDB generates an unexpected query plan for the `BEGIN; SELECT... FOR UPDATE;` point query when TiKV is not configured for the read engine [#39344](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/39344) @[Yisaer](https://github.com/Yisaer)
    - Fix the issue that mistakenly pushing down `StreamAgg` to TiFlash causes wrong result [#39266](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/39266) @[fixdb](https://github.com/fixdb)
```

+ Tools

    + Backup & Restore (BR)

        - 修复清理备份日志数据时错误删除数据导致数据丢失的问题 [#38939](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/38939) @[Leavrth](https://github.com/Leavrth)
        - 修复在大于 6.1 版本关闭 new_collation 设置，仍然恢复失败的问题 [#39150](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/39150) @[MoCuishle28](https://github.com/MoCuishle28)
        - 修复因非 s3 存储的不兼容请求导致备份 panic 的问题 [39545](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/39545) @[3pointer](https://github.com/3pointer)

    + TiCDC

        - 修复 PD leader crash时 CDC 卡住的问题 [#7470](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/7470) @[zeminzhou](https://github.com/zeminzhou)
        - 修复在执行drop table 时用户快速暂停恢复同步任务导致可能的数据丢失问题 [#7682](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/7682) @[asddongmen](https://github.com/asddongmen)
        - 兼容上游开启 TiFlash 时版本兼容性问题 [#7744](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/7744) @[overvenus](https://github.com/overvenus)
        - 修复下游网络出现故障导致cdc 卡住的问题 [#7706](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/7706) @[hicqu](https://github.com/hicqu)
        - 修复用户快速删除、创建同名同步任务可能导致的数据丢失问题 [#7657](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/7657) @[overvenus](https://github.com/overvenus)

    + TiDB Data Migration (DM)

>         - Fix the issue that a `task-mode:all` task cannot be started when the upstream database enables GTID mode but does not have any data [#7037](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/7037) @[liumengya94](https://github.com/liumengya94)

Author: ```suggestion
        - Fix the issue that a `task-mode:all` task cannot be started when the upstream database enables the GTID mode but does not have any data [#7037](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/7037) @[liumengya94](https://github.com/liumengya94)
```

        - Fix the issue that data is replicated for multiple times when a new DM worker is scheduled before the existing worker exits [#7658](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/7658) @[GMHDBJD](https://github.com/GMHDBJD)

>         - Fix the issue that DM precheck is not passed when the upstream database uses regular expression to grant privileges [#7645](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/7645) @[lance6716](https://github.com/lance6716)

Author: ```suggestion
        - Fix the issue that DM precheck is not passed when the upstream database uses regular expressions to grant privileges [#7645](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/7645) @[lance6716](https://github.com/lance6716)
```

    + TiDB Lightning

        - Fix the memory leakage issue when TiDB Lightning imports a huge source data file [#39331](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/39331) @[dsdashun](https://github.com/dsdashun)

>         - Fix the issue that TiDB Lightning cannot detect conflict correctly when importing data in parallel [#39476](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/39476) @[dsdashun](https://github.com/dsdashun)

Author: ```suggestion
        - Fix the issue that TiDB Lightning cannot detect conflicts correctly when importing data in parallel [#39476](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/39476) @[dsdashun](https://github.com/dsdashun)
```

---
title: TiDB 6.5.0 Release Notes
---

# TiDB 6.5.0 Release Notes

Release date: xx xx, 2022

TiDB version: 6.5.0

Quick access: [Quick start](https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/v6.5/quick-start-with-tidb) | [Production deployment](https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/v6.5/production-deployment-using-tiup) | [Installation packages](https://www.pingcap.com/download/?version=v6.5.0#version-list)

TiDB 6.5.0 is a Long-Term Support Release (LTS).

> Compared with the previous LTS 6.1.0, 6.5.0 not only includes new features, improvements, and bug fixes released in [6.2.0-DMR](/releases/release-6.2.0.md), [6.3.0-DMR](/releases/release-6.3.0.md), [6.4.0-DMR](/releases/release -6.4.0.md), but also introduces the following key features and improvements:

Author: ```suggestion
Compared with the previous LTS 6.1.0, 6.5.0 not only includes new features, improvements, and bug fixes released in [6.2.0-DMR](/releases/release-6.2.0.md), [6.3.0-DMR](/releases/release-6.3.0.md), [6.4.0-DMR](/releases/release-6.4.0.md), but also introduces the following key features and improvements:
```

- Enable [index acceleration](/system-variables.md#tidb_ddl_enable_fast_reorg-new-in-v630) by default, which improves the performance of adding indexes by 10 times compared with v6.1.
- Support TiDB global memory control via [`tidb_server_memory_limit`](/system-variables.md#tidb_server_memory_limit-new-in-v640).
- Support [`FLASHBACK CLUSTER TO TIMESTAMP`](/sql-statements/sql-statement-flashback-to-timestamp.md), compatible with TiCDC and PITR.
- Support a high-performance and globally monotonic [`AUTO_INCREMENT`](/auto-increment.md#mysql-compatible-mode) column attribute, compatible with MySQL.
- Enhance the [optimizer cost model](/cost-model.md#cost-model-version-2) and further enhance the [INDEX MERGE](/glossary.md#index-merge) feature.
- Support [pushing down the `JSON_EXTRACT()` function](/tiflash/tiflash-supported-pushdown-calculations.md) to TiFlash.

> - TiDB Lightning and Dumpling support [importing](tidb-lightning/tidb-lightning-data-source.md) and [exporting](/dumpling-overview.md#improve-export-efficiency-through-concurrency) compressed SQL and CSV files files.

Author: ```suggestion
- TiDB Lightning and Dumpling support [importing](tidb-lightning/tidb-lightning-data-source.md) and [exporting](/dumpling-overview.md#improve-export-efficiency-through-concurrency) compressed SQL and CSV files.
```

- TiDB Data Migration (DM) supports [continuous data validation](/dm/dm-continuous-data-validation.md).
- Support [password management](/password-management.md) policies that meet password compliance auditing requirements.
- Provide row-level [Time to live (TTL)](/time-to-live.md) to manage data lifecycle (experimental).

> - Supports [non-transactional DML statements](/non-transactional-dml.md) to improve cluster stability.

Author: ```suggestion
- Support [non-transactional DML statements](/non-transactional-dml.md) to improve cluster stability.
```

- TiCDC supports [replicating changed logs to storage services](ticdc/ticdc-sink-to-cloud-storage.md) such as Amazon S3, Azure Blob Storage, and NFS.
- Support [bidirectional replication](/ticdc/ticdc-bidirectional-replication.md) between two or more TiDB clusters.

> - Improve the recovery performance of [PITR](/br-pitr-guide.md#carry-pitr) by x times and reduce RPO to x min.

Author: ```suggestion
- Improve the recovery performance of [PITR](/br-pitr-guide.md#carry-pitr) by x times and reduce RPO to x minutes.
```

> - Enable [index acceleration](/system-variables.md#tidb_ddl_enable_fast_reorg-new-in-v630) by default, which improves the performance of adding indexes by 10 times compared with v6.1.
> - Support TiDB global memory control via [`tidb_server_memory_limit`](/system-variables.md#tidb_server_memory_limit-new-in-v640).
> - Support [`FLASHBACK CLUSTER TO TIMESTAMP`](/sql-statements/sql-statement-flashback-to-timestamp.md), compatible with TiCDC and PITR.
> - Support a high-performance and globally monotonic [`AUTO_INCREMENT`](/auto-increment.md#mysql-compatible-mode) column attribute, compatible with MySQL.
> - Enhance the [optimizer cost model](/cost-model.md#cost-model-version-2) and further enhance the [INDEX MERGE](/glossary.md#index-merge) feature.
> - Support [pushing down the `JSON_EXTRACT()` function](/tiflash/tiflash-supported-pushdown-calculations.md) to TiFlash.
> - TiDB Lightning and Dumpling support [importing](tidb-lightning/tidb-lightning-data-source.md) and [exporting](/dumpling-overview.md#improve-export-efficiency-through-concurrency) compressed SQL and CSV files.
> - TiDB Data Migration (DM) supports [continuous data validation](/dm/dm-continuous-data-validation.md).
> - Support [password management](/password-management.md) policies that meet password compliance auditing requirements.
> - Provide row-level [Time to live (TTL)](/time-to-live.md) to manage data lifecycle (experimental).
> - Support [non-transactional DML statements](/non-transactional-dml.md) to improve cluster stability.
> - TiCDC supports [replicating changed logs to storage services](ticdc/ticdc-sink-to-cloud-storage.md) such as Amazon S3, Azure Blob Storage, and NFS.
> - Support [bidirectional replication](/ticdc/ticdc-bidirectional-replication.md) between two or more TiDB clusters.
> - Improve the recovery performance of [PITR](/br-pitr-guide.md#carry-pitr) by x times and reduce RPO to x minutes.
> - Improve the TiCDC throughput of [replicating data to Kafka](/replicate-data-to-kafka.md) by x times and reduces replication latency to x seconds.

Author: ```suggestion
- Enable [index acceleration](/system-variables.md#tidb_ddl_enable_fast_reorg-new-in-v630) by default, which improves the performance of adding indexes by 10 times compared with v6.1.
- Support TiDB global memory control via [`tidb_server_memory_limit`](/system-variables.md#tidb_server_memory_limit-new-in-v640).
- Support a high-performance and globally monotonic [`AUTO_INCREMENT`](/auto-increment.md#mysql-compatible-mode) column attribute, compatible with MySQL.
- Support [`FLASHBACK CLUSTER TO TIMESTAMP`](/sql-statements/sql-statement-flashback-to-timestamp.md), compatible with TiCDC and PITR.
- Enhance the [optimizer cost model](/cost-model.md#cost-model-version-2) and further enhance the [INDEX MERGE](/glossary.md#index-merge) feature.
- Support pushing down the `JSON_EXTRACT()` function to TiFlash.
- Support [password management](/password-management.md) policies that meet password compliance auditing requirements.
- TiDB Lightning and Dumpling support [importing](tidb-lightning/tidb-lightning-data-source.md) and [exporting](/dumpling-overview.md#improve-export-efficiency-through-concurrency) compressed SQL and CSV files.
- TiDB Data Migration (DM) supports [continuous data validation](/dm/dm-continuous-data-validation.md).
- Improve the recovery performance of [PITR](/br-pitr-guide.md#carry-pitr) by x times and reduce RPO to x minutes.
- TiCDC supports [replicating changed logs to storage services](ticdc/ticdc-sink-to-cloud-storage.md) such as Amazon S3, Azure Blob Storage, and NFS.
- Provide row-level [Time to live (TTL)](/time-to-live.md) to manage data lifecycle (experimental).

```

* Continuous data validation in DM is GA [#4426](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/4426) @[D3Hunter](https://github.com/D3Hunter) **tw@hfxsd**

    In the process of migrating incremental data from upstream to downstream databases, there is a small probability that data flow might cause errors or data loss. In scenarios where strong data consistency is required, such as credit and securities businesses, you can perform a full volume checksum on the data after migration to ensure data consistency. However, in some incremental replication scenarios, upstream and downstream writes are continuous and uninterrupted because the upstream and downstream data is constantly changing, making it difficult to perform consistency checks on all data.

    Previously, you needed to interrupt the business to validate the full data, which would affect your business. Now, with this feature, you can perform incremental data validation without interrupting the business.

    For more information, see [User document](/dm/dm-continuous-data-validation.md).

### TiDB data share subscription

> * TiCDC supports replicating changed logs to storage sinks [tiflow#6797](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/6797) @[zhaoxinyu](https://github.com/zhaoxinyu) **tw@shichun-0415**

Author: ```suggestion
* TiCDC supports replicating changed logs to storage sinks (experimental) [tiflow#6797](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/6797) @[zhaoxinyu](https://github.com/zhaoxinyu) **tw@shichun-0415**
```

* PITR 性能大幅提升提升 **tw@shichun-0415

  PITR 恢复的日志恢复阶单台 TiKV 的恢复速度可以达到 xx MB/s，提升了 x 倍，恢复速度可扩展，有效地降低容灾场景的 RTO 指标；容灾场景的 RPO 优化到 5 min，在常规的集群运维，如滚动升级，单 TiKV 故障等场景下，可以达到 RPO = 5 min 目标。

* TiKV-BR 工具 GA, 支持 RawKV 的备份和恢复 [#67](https://github.com/tikv/migration/issues/67) @[pingyu](https://github.com/pingyu) @[haojinming](https://github.com/haojinming) **tw@shichun-0415**

    TiKV-BR 是一个 TiKV 集群的备份和恢复工具。TiKV 可以独立于 TiDB，与 PD 构成 KV 数据库，此时的产品形态为 RawKV。TiKV-BR 工具支持对使用 RawKV 的产品进行备份和恢复，也支持将 TiKV 集群中的数据从 `API V1` 备份为 `API V2` 数据， 以实现 TiKV 集群 [`api-version`](/tikv-configuration-file.md#api-version-从-v610-版本开始引入) 的升级。

    更多信息，请参考[用户文档](https://tikv.org/docs/latest/concepts/explore-tikv-features/backup-restore/)。

## Compatibility changes

### System variables

| Variable name | Change type | Description |
|--------|------------------------------|------|
| [`tidb_cost_model_version`](/system-variables.md#tidb_cost_model_version-introduced-new-in-v620) | Modified | Change the default value from `1` to `2`, meaning that Cost Model Version 2 is used for index selection and operator selection by default.  |

> | [`tidb_enable_metadata_lock`](/system-variables.md#tidb_enable_metadata_lock-new-in-v630) | Modified | Change the default value from `OFF` to `ON`, meaning that the metadata lock feature is enabled by default. |

Author: ```suggestion
| [`tidb_enable_metadata_lock`](/system-variables.md#tidb_enable_metadata_lock-new-in-v630) | Modified | Change the default value from `OFF` to `ON`, meaning that the metadata lock feature is enabled by default. |
| [`tidb_enable_tiflash_read_for_write_stmt`](/system-variables.md#tidb_enable_tiflash_read_for_write_stmt-introduced-new-in-v630) | Modified | Takes effect starting from v6.5.0. It controls whether read operations in SQL statements containing `INSERT`, `DELETE`, and `UPDATE` can be pushed down to TiFlash. The default value is `OFF` |
```

> | [`tidb_ddl_enable_fast_reorg`](/system-variables.md#tidb_ddl_enable_fast_reorg-new-in-v630) | Modified | Change the default value from `OFF` to `ON`, meaning that the acceleration of `ADD INDEX` and `CREATE INDEX` is enabled by default. |

Author: ```suggestion
| [`tidb_ddl_enable_fast_reorg`](/system-variables.md#tidb_ddl_enable_fast_reorg-new-in-v630) | Modified | Change the default value from `OFF` to `ON`, meaning that the acceleration of `ADD INDEX` and `CREATE INDEX` is enabled by default. |
| [`tidb_mem_quota_query`](/system-variables.md#tidb_mem_quota_query) | Modified | For versions earlier than TiDB v6.5.0, this variable is used to set the threshold value of memory quota for a query. For TiDB v6.5.0 and later versions, this variable is used to set the threshold value of memory quota for a session.  |
| [`tidb_replica_read`](/system-variables.md#tidb_replica_read-new-in-v40) | Modified | Starting from v6.5.0, when this variable is set to`closest-adaptive` and the estimated result of a read request is greater than or equal to [`tidb_adaptive_closest _read_threshold`](/system-variables.md#tidb_adaptive_closest_read_threshold-new-in-v630), the number of TiDB nodes whose `closest-adaptive` configuration takes effect is limited in each availability zone, which is always the same as the number of TiDB nodes in the availability zone with the fewest TiDB nodes, and the other TiDB nodes automatically read from the leader replica. |
```

| [`password_reuse_interval`](/system-variables.md#password_reuse_interval-new-in-v650) | Newly added | This variable is used to establish a password reuse policy that allows TiDB to limit password reuse based on time elapsed. The default value `0` means disabling the password reuse policy based on time elapsed. |
| [`tidb_cdc_write_source`](/system-variables.md#tidb_cdc_write_source-new-in-v650) | Newly added | When this variable is set to a value other than 0, data written in this session is considered to be written by TiCDC. This variable can only be modified by TiCDC. Do not manually modify this variable in any case. |
| [`tidb_index_merge_intersection_concurrency`](/system-variables.md#tidb_index_merge_intersection_concurrency-new-in-v650) | Newly added | Sets the maximum concurrency for the intersection operations that index merge performs. It is effective only when TiDB accesses partitioned tables in the dynamic pruning mode. |

> | [`tidb_mem_quota_query`](/system-variables.md#tidb_mem_quota_query) | Modified | For versions earlier than TiDB v6.5.0, this variable is used to set the threshold value of memory quota for a query. For TiDB v6.5.0 and later versions, this variable is used to set the threshold value of memory quota for a session.  |

Author: ```suggestion
```

| [`validate_password.policy`](/system-variables.md#validate_passwordpolicy-new-in-v650) | Newly added | This variable controls the policy for the password complexity check. This variable takes effect only when [`validate_password.enable`](/system-variables.md#password_reuse_interval-new-in-v650) is enabled. The default value is `1`. |
| [`validate_password.special_char_count`](/system-variables.md#validate_passwordspecial_char_count-new-in-v650) | Newly added | A check item in the password complexity check. It checks whether the password contains sufficient special characters. This variable takes effect only when [`validate_password.enable`](/system-variables.md#password_reuse_interval-new-in-v650) is enabled and [`validate_password.policy`](/system-variables.md#validate_passwordpolicy-new-in-v650) is set to `1` (MEDIUM) or larger. The default value is `1`. |

### Configuration file parameters

| Configuration file | Configuration parameter | Change type | Description |
| -------- | -------- | -------- | -------- |

> | TiDB | [`disconnect-on-expired-password`](/tidb-configuration-file.md#disconnect-on-expired-password-new-in-v650) | Newly added | Determines whether TiDB disconnects the client connection when the password is expired. The default value is `true`, which means the client connection is disconnected when the password is expired. |
> | TiDB | [`server-memory-quota`](/tidb-configuration-file.md#server-memory-quota-new-in-v409) | Deprecated | Since v6.5.0, this configuration item is deprecated. Instead, use the system variable [`tidb_server_memory_limit`](/system-variables.md#tidb_server_memory_limit-new-in-v640) for setting.  |

Author: ```suggestion
| TiDB | [`server-memory-quota`](/tidb-configuration-file.md#server-memory-quota-new-in-v409) | Deprecated | Since v6.5.0, this configuration item is deprecated. Instead, use the system variable [`tidb_server_memory_limit`](/system-variables.md#tidb_server_memory_limit-new-in-v640) for setting.  |
| TiDB | [`disconnect-on-expired-password`](/tidb-configuration-file.md#disconnect-on-expired-password-new-in-v650) | Newly added | Determines whether TiDB disconnects the client connection when the password is expired. The default value is `true`, which means the client connection is disconnected when the password is expired. |
```

> | TiKV | [`cdc.min-ts-interval`](/tikv-configuration-file.md#min-ts-interval)  | Modified | The default value changes from `1s` to `200ms`. |

Author: ```suggestion
| TiKV | [`cdc.min-ts-interval`](/tikv-configuration-file.md#min-ts-interval)  | Modified | Change the default value from `1s` to `200ms`. |
| TiKV | [`memory-use-ratio`](/tikv-configuration-file.md#memory-use-ratio-introduced-new-in-v650) | Newly added | Indicates the ratio of available memory to total system memory in PITR log recovery. | 

```

| [`password_history`](/system-variables.md#password_history-new-in-v650) | Newly added | This variable is used to establish a password reuse policy that allows TiDB to limit password reuse based on the number of password changes. The default value `0` means disabling the password reuse policy based on the number of password changes. |
| [`password_reuse_interval`](/system-variables.md#password_reuse_interval-new-in-v650) | Newly added | This variable is used to establish a password reuse policy that allows TiDB to limit password reuse based on time elapsed. The default value `0` means disabling the password reuse policy based on time elapsed. |
| [`tidb_cdc_write_source`](/system-variables.md#tidb_cdc_write_source-new-in-v650) | Newly added | When this variable is set to a value other than 0, data written in this session is considered to be written by TiCDC. This variable can only be modified by TiCDC. Do not manually modify this variable in any case. |

> | [`tidb_index_merge_intersection_concurrency`](/system-variables.md#tidb_index_merge_intersection_concurrency-从-v650-版本开始引入) | 新增 | 这个变量用来设置索引合并进行交集操作时的最大并发度，仅在以动态裁剪模式访问分区表时有效。 |
> | [`tidb_mem_quota_query`](/system-variables.md#tidb_mem_quota_query) | 修改 | 在 v6.5.0 之前的版本中，该变量用来设置单条查询的内存使用限制。在 v6.5.0 及之后的版本中，该变量用来设置单个会话整体的内存使用限制。 |

Author: ```suggestion
| [`tidb_index_merge_intersection_concurrency`](/system-variables.md#tidb_index_merge_intersection_concurrency-new-in-v650) | Newly added | This variable is used to set the maximum concurrency for index merging for intersection operations, valid only when accessing partitioned tables in dynamic trimming mode. |
| [`tidb_mem_quota_query`](/system-variables.md#tidb_mem_quota_query) | Modified | In versions prior to v6.5.0, this variable was used to set the memory usage limit for a single query. In v6.5.0 and later, this variable is used to set the overall memory usage limit for a single session. |
```

| [`validate_password.policy`](/system-variables.md#validate_passwordpolicy-new-in-v650) | Newly added | This variable controls the policy for the password complexity check. This variable takes effect only when [`validate_password.enable`](/system-variables.md#password_reuse_interval-new-in-v650) is enabled. The default value is `1`. |
| [`validate_password.special_char_count`](/system-variables.md#validate_passwordspecial_char_count-new-in-v650) | Newly added | A check item in the password complexity check. It checks whether the password contains sufficient special characters. This variable takes effect only when [`validate_password.enable`](/system-variables.md#password_reuse_interval-new-in-v650) is enabled and [`validate_password.policy`](/system-variables.md#validate_passwordpolicy-new-in-v650) is set to `1` (MEDIUM) or larger. The default value is `1`. |

> |        |                              |      |
> |        |                              |      |

Author: ```suggestion
```

### Configuration file parameters

> | 配置文件 | 配置项 | 修改类型 | 描述 |

Author: ```suggestion
| Configuration file | Configuration parameter | Change type | Description |
```

| -------- | -------- | -------- | -------- |
| TiDB | [`disconnect-on-expired-password`](/tidb-configuration-file.md#disconnect-on-expired-password-new-in-v650) | Newly added | Determines whether TiDB disconnects the client connection when the password is expired. The default value is `true`, which means the client connection is disconnected when the password is expired. |
| TiDB | [`server-memory-quota`](/tidb-configuration-file.md#server-memory-quota-从-v409-版本开始引入) | 废弃 | 自 v6.5.0 起，该配置项被废弃。请使用 [`tidb_server_memory_limit`](/system-variables.md#tidb_server_memory_limit-从-v640-版本开始引入) 系统变量进行设置。 |

> | TiKV | [`cdc.min-ts-interval`](/tikv-configuration-file.md#min-ts-interval) | 修改 | 默认值从 `1s` 修改为 `200ms` |

Author: ```suggestion
| TiKV | [`cdc.min-ts-interval`](/tikv-configuration-file.md#min-ts-interval)  | Modified | The default value changes from `1s` to `200ms`. |
```

> |          |          |          |          |
> |          |          |          |          |

Author: ```suggestion
```

### Others

> 

Author: ```suggestion

- Starting from v6.4.0, the mysql.user table adds two new columns: `Password_reuse_history` and `Password_reuse_time`. 
- - The [index acceleration](/system-variables.md#tidb_ddl_enable_fast_reorg - introduced since -v630-version) feature is enabled by default and is not compatible with the [PITR (Point-in-time recovery)](/br/br-pitr-guide.md) feature. When using the index acceleration feature, you need to make sure that no PITR backup task is started in the background, otherwise unintended results might occur, see [tidb_ddl_enable_fast_reorg](/system-variables.md#tidb_ddl_enable_fast_reorg-new-in-v630).

```

+ Tools

    + TiDB Dashboard

        - Add three new fields to the slow query page: "Is Prepared?"，"Is Plan from Cache?"，"Is Plan from Binding?" [#1451](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb-dashboard/issues/1451) @[shhdgit](https://github.com/shhdgit)

    + Backup & Restore (BR)

        - 优化清理备份日志数据是 BR 的内存使用 [#38869](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/38869) @[Leavrth](https://github.com/Leavrth)
        - 提升在恢复时的稳定性，允许 PD leader 切换的情况发生 [#36910](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/36910) @[MoCuishle28](https://github.com/MoCuishle28)
        - 日志备份的 tls 功能使用 openssl 协议，提升 tls 兼容性。[#13867](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/13867) @[YuJuncen](https://github.com/YuJuncen)

    + TiCDC

        - 采用并发的方式对数据进行编码，极大提升了同步到 kafka 的吞吐能力 [#7532](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/7532) [#7543](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/7543) [#7540](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/7540) @[3AceShowHand](https://github.com/3AceShowHand) @[sdojjy](https://github.com/sdojjy)

    + TiDB Data Migration (DM)

>         - Improve the data replication performance for DM by not parsing the data of tables in the block list [#4287](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/4287) @[GMHDBJD](https://github.com/GMHDBJD)
>         - Improve the write efficiency of DM relay by using asynchronous write and batch write [#4287](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/4287) @[GMHDBJD](https://github.com/GMHDBJD)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
        - Improve the data replication performance for DM by not parsing the data of tables in the block list [#7622](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/pull/7622) @[GMHDBJD](https://github.com/GMHDBJD)
        - Improve the write efficiency of DM relay by using asynchronous write and batch write [#7580](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/pull/7580) @[GMHDBJD](https://github.com/GMHDBJD)
```

        - Fix the issue that data is replicated for multiple times when a new DM worker is scheduled before the existing worker exits [#7658](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/7658) @[GMHDBJD](https://github.com/GMHDBJD)
        - Fix the issue that DM precheck is not passed when the upstream database uses regular expressions to grant privileges [#7645](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/7645) @[lance6716](https://github.com/lance6716)

    + TiDB Lightning

        - Fix the memory leakage issue when TiDB Lightning imports a huge source data file [#39331](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/39331) @[dsdashun](https://github.com/dsdashun)
        - Fix the issue that TiDB Lightning cannot detect conflicts correctly when importing data in parallel [#39476](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/39476) @[dsdashun](https://github.com/dsdashun)

## Contributors

We would like to thank the following contributors from the TiDB community:

> - [贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)

Author: ```suggestion
- [e1ijah1](https://github.com/e1ijah1)
- [guoxiangCN](https://github.com/guoxiangCN) (First-time contributor)
- [jiayang-zheng](https://github.com/jiayang-zheng)
- [jiyfhust](https://github.com/jiyfhust)
- [mikechengwei](https://github.com/mikechengwei)
- [pingandb](https://github.com/pingandb)
- [sashashura](https://github.com/sashashura)
- [sourcelliu](https://github.com/sourcelliu)
- [wxbty](https://github.com/wxbty)
```

    For more information, see [User document](/password-management.md#failed-login-tracking-and-temporary-account-locking-policy).

### Observability

* TiDB Dashboard can be deployed on Kubernetes as an independent Pod [#1447](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb-dashboard/issues/1447) @[SabaPing](https://github.com/SabaPing) **tw@shichun-0415

    TiDB v6.5.0 (and later) and TiDB Operator v1.4.0 (and later) support deploying TiDB Dashboard as an independent Pod on Kubernetes. Using TiDB Operator, you can access the IP address of this Pod to start TiDB Dashboard.

    Independently deploying TiDB Dashboard provides the following benefits:

    - The compute work of TiDB Dashboard does not pose pressure on PD nodes. This ensures more stable cluster operation.
    - The user can still access TiDB Dashboard for diagnosis even if the PD node is unavailable.
    - Accessing TiDB Dashboard in Internet does not involve the privileged interfaces of PD. Therefore, the security risk of the cluster is mitigated.

  For more information, see [Deploy TiDB Dashboard independently in TiDB Operator](https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb-in-kubernetes/dev/get-started#deploy-tidb-dashboard-independently).

> * Performance Overview dashboard adds TiFlash and CDC (Change Data Capture) panels

Author: ```suggestion
* Performance Overview dashboard adds TiFlash and CDC (Change Data Capture) panels **tw@qiancai
```

> * Performance Overview dashboard adds TiFlash and CDC (Change Data Capture) panels **tw@qiancai**

Author: ```suggestion
* Performance Overview dashboard adds TiFlash and CDC (Change Data Capture) panels [#39230](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/39230) @[dbsid](https://github.com/dbsid) **tw@qiancai**
```

>     Since v6.1.0, TiDB has introduced the Performance Overview dashboard in Grafana, which provides a system-level entry for overall performance diagnosis of TiDB, TiKV, and PD. In v6.5.0, the Performance Overview dashboard adds TiFlash and CDC (Change Data Capture) panels. With these panels, starting from v6.5.0, you can use the Performance Overview dashboard to analyze the performance of all components in a TiDB cluster.

Author: ```suggestion
    Since v6.1.0, TiDB has introduced the Performance Overview dashboard in Grafana, which provides a system-level entry for overall performance diagnosis of TiDB, TiKV, and PD. In v6.5.0, the Performance Overview dashboard adds TiFlash and CDC panels. With these panels, starting from v6.5.0, you can use the Performance Overview dashboard to analyze the performance of all components in a TiDB cluster.
```

>     The TiFlash and CDC panels reorganize with TiFlash and TiCDC monitoring information, which can help you greatly improve the efficiency of performance analysis and troubleshooting for TiFlash and TiCDC.

Author: ```suggestion
    The TiFlash and CDC panels reorganize with TiFlash and TiCDC monitoring information, which can help you greatly improve the efficiency of analyzing and troubleshooting TiFlash and TiCDC performance issues.
```

>     The TiFlash and CDC panels reorganize with TiFlash and TiCDC monitoring related information, which can help you grealty improve the efficiency of performance analysis and troubleshooting for TiFlash and TiCDC.

Author: ```suggestion
    The TiFlash and CDC panels reorganize with TiFlash and TiCDC monitoring information, which can help you greatly improve the efficiency of performance analysis and troubleshooting for TiFlash and TiCDC.
```

    - On the [TiFlash panels](/grafana-performance-overview-dashboard.md#tiflash), you can easily view the request types, latency analysis, and resource usage overview of your TiFlash cluster.
    - On the [CDC panels](/grafana-performance-overview-dashboard.md#cdc), you can easily view the health, synchronization latency, data flow, and downstream write latency of your TiCDC cluster.

>   For more information, see [user document](performance-tuning-method.md/).

Author: ```suggestion
  For more information, see [user document](performance-tuning-method.md).
```

    The storage sink supports changed logs in the canal-json and CSV formats. Noticeably, the latency of replicating changed logs from TiCDC to storage can be as short as xx. For more information, see [User document](/ticdc/ticdc-sink-to-cloud-storage.md).

* TiCDC supports bidirectional replication across multiple clusters @[asddongmen](https://github.com/asddongmen) **tw@shichun-0415**

    TiCDC supports bidirectional replication across multiple TiDB clusters. If you need a multi-master TiDB solution for your application, especially a multi-master solution across multiple regions, you can use this feature to build one. By configuring the `bdr-mode = true` parameter for the TiCDC changefeeds from each TiDB cluster to the other TiDB clusters, you can achieve bidirectional data replication across multiple TiDB clusters.

    For more information, see [user document](/ticdc/ticdc-bidirectional-replication.md).

* TiCDC supports updating TLS online [#7908](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/7908) @[CharlesCheung96](https://github.com/CharlesCheung96) **tw@shichun-0415**

>     TiCDC supports online updates of TLS certificates. To keep data secure, you will set an expiration policy for the certificate used by the system. After the expiration period, the system uses a new certificate. TiCDC v6.5.0 supports online updates of TLS certificates. Without interrupting the replication tasks, TiCDC can automatically detect and update the certificate, without the need for manual intervention.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    To keep data secure, you need to set an expiration policy for the certificate used by the system. After the expiration period, the system needs a new certificate. TiCDC v6.5.0 supports online updates of TLS certificates. Without interrupting the replication tasks, TiCDC can automatically detect and update the certificate, without the need for manual intervention.
```

* TiKV-BR GA: Supports backing up and restoring RawKV [#67](https://github.com/tikv/migration/issues/67) @[pingyu](https://github.com/pingyu) @[haojinming](https://github.com/haojinming) **tw@shichun-0415**

    TiKV-BR is a backup and restore tool used in TiKV clusters. TiKV and PD can constitute a KV database when used without TiDB, which is called RawKV. TiKV-BR supports data backup and restore for products that use RawKV. TiKV-BR can also upgrade the [`api-version`](/tikv-configuration-file.md#api-version-new-in-v610) from `API V1` to `API V2` for TiKV cluster.

    For more information, see [User document](https://tikv.org/docs/latest/concepts/explore-tikv-features/backup-restore/).

## Compatibility changes

### System variables

| Variable name | Change type | Description |
|--------|------------------------------|------|

> |[`tidb_enable_amend_pessimistic_txn`](/system-variables.md#tidb_enable_amend_pessimistic_txn-new-in-v407)| Deprecated | Starting from v6.5.0, this variable is deprecated, and TiDB uses the [Metadata Lock](/metadata-lock.md) feature by default to avoid the `Information schema is changed` error. |

Author: ```suggestion
|[`tidb_enable_amend_pessimistic_txn`](/system-variables.md#tidb_enable_amend_pessimistic_txn-new-in-v407)| Deprecated | Starting from v6.5.0, this variable is deprecated, and TiDB uses the [Metadata Lock](/metadata-lock.md) feature by default to avoid the `Information schema is changed` error. |
| [`tidb_enable_outer_join_reorder`](/system-variables.md#tidb_enable_outer_join_reorder-new-in-v610) | Modified | Changes the default value from `OFF` to `ON`, meaning that the [Join Reorder algorithm](/join-reorder.md) of Outer Join is enabled by default. |
```

| TiKV | [`memory-use-ratio`](/tikv-configuration-file.md#memory-use-ratio-introduced-new-in-v650) | Newly added | Indicates the ratio of available memory to total system memory in PITR log recovery. | 

### Others

- Starting from v6.5.0, the `mysql.user` table adds two new columns: `Password_reuse_history` and `Password_reuse_time`. 
- The [index acceleration](/system-variables.md#tidb_ddl_enable_fast_reorg-new-in-v630) feature is enabled by default and is not compatible with the [PITR (Point-in-time recovery)](/br/br-pitr-guide.md) feature. When using the index acceleration feature, you need to make sure that no PITR backup task is running in the background; otherwise, unexpected results might occur. For more information, see [tidb_ddl_enable_fast_reorg](/system-variables.md#tidb_ddl_enable_fast_reorg-new-in-v630).

## Deprecated feature

Starting from v6.5.0, the [`AMEND TRANSACTION`](/system-variables.md#tidb_enable_amend_pessimistic_txn-new-in-v407) mechanism introduced in v4.0.7 is deprecated and replaced by [Metadata Lock](/metadata-lock.md).

## Improvements

+ TiDB

>     - For `BIT` and `CHAR` columns, make the result of `INFORMATION_SCHEMA.COLUMNS` consistent with MySQL [#25472](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/25472) @[hawkingrei](https://github.com/hawkingrei)

Author: ```suggestion
    - For `BIT` and `CHAR` columns, make the result of `INFORMATION_SCHEMA.COLUMNS` consistent with MySQL [#25472](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/25472) @[hawkingrei](https://github.com/hawkingrei)
    - Optimize the TiDB probing mechanism for TiFlash nodes in the TiFlash MPP mode to mitigate the performance impact when nodes are abnormal [#39686](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/39686) @[hackersean](https://github.com/hackersean)
```

Author: @hackersean, PTAL

TiDB 6.5.0 is a Long-Term Support Release (LTS).

Compared with the previous LTS 6.1.0, 6.5.0 not only includes new features, improvements, and bug fixes released in [6.2.0-DMR](/releases/release-6.2.0.md), [6.3.0-DMR](/releases/release-6.3.0.md), [6.4.0-DMR](/releases/release-6.4.0.md), but also introduces the following key features and improvements:

- The [index acceleration](/system-variables.md#tidb_ddl_enable_fast_reorg-new-in-v630) feature becomes generally available (GA), which improves the performance of adding indexes by about 10 times compared with v6.1.0.
- The TiDB global memory control becomes GA, and you can control the memory consumption threshold via [`tidb_server_memory_limit`](/system-variables.md#tidb_server_memory_limit-new-in-v640).
- The high-performance and globally monotonic [`AUTO_INCREMENT`](/auto-increment.md#mysql-compatible-mode) column attribute becomes GA, which is compatible with MySQL.

> - Support restoring a cluster to a specific point in time by using [`FLASHBACK CLUSTER TO TIMESTAMP`](/sql-statements/sql-statement-flashback-to-timestamp.md) (GA), which is compatible with TiCDC and PITR.

Author: ```suggestion
- [`FLASHBACK CLUSTER TO TIMESTAMP`](/sql-statements/sql-statement-flashback-to-timestamp.md) is now compatible with TiCDC and PITR and becomes GA.
```

Author: @Oreoxmt PTAL

- Enhance TiDB optimizer by making the more accurate [Cost Model version 2](/cost-model.md#cost-model-version-2) generally available and supporting expressions connected by `AND` for [INDEX MERGE](/explain-index-merge.md).
- Support pushing down the `JSON_EXTRACT()` function to TiFlash.
- Support [password management](/password-management.md) policies that meet password compliance auditing requirements.
- TiDB Lightning and Dumpling support [importing](tidb-lightning/tidb-lightning-data-source.md) and [exporting](/dumpling-overview.md#improve-export-efficiency-through-concurrency) compressed SQL and CSV files.
- TiDB Data Migration (DM) [continuous data validation](/dm/dm-continuous-data-validation.md) becomes GA.

> - TiDB Backup & Restore supports snapshot checkpoint backup, improves the recovery performance of [PITR](/br-pitr-guide.md#carry-pitr) by x times, and reduces RPO to x minutes.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- TiDB Backup & Restore supports snapshot checkpoint backup, improves the recovery performance of [PITR](/br-pitr-guide.md#carry-pitr) by 50%, and reduces the RPO to as short as 5 minutes.
```

- Improve the TiCDC throughput of [replicating data to Kafka](/replicate-data-to-kafka.md) by x times and reduces replication latency to x seconds.
- Provide row-level [Time to live (TTL)](/time-to-live.md) to manage data lifecycle (experimental).

> - TiCDC supports [replicating changed logs to object storage ](ticdc/ticdc-sink-to-cloud-storage.md) such as Amazon S3, Azure Blob Storage, and NFS (experimental).

Author: ```suggestion
- TiCDC supports [replicating changed logs to object storage](ticdc/ticdc-sink-to-cloud-storage.md) such as Amazon S3, Azure Blob Storage, and NFS (experimental).
```

    TiDB v6.3.0 introduces the [Add index acceleration](/system-variables.md#tidb_ddl_enable_fast_reorg-new-in-v630) as an experimental feature to improve the speed of backfilling when creating an index. In v6.5.0, this feature becomes GA and is enabled by default, and the performance on large tables is expected to be 10 times faster. The acceleration feature is suitable for scenarios where a single SQL statement adds an index serially. When multiple SQL statements add indexes in parallel, only one of the SQL statements will be accelerated.

* Provide lightweight metadata lock to improve the DML success rate during DDL change (GA) [#37275](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/37275) @[wjhuang2016](https://github.com/wjhuang2016) **tw@Oreoxmt**

    TiDB v6.3.0 introduces [Metadata lock](/metadata-lock.md) as an experimental feature. To avoid the `Information schema is changed` error caused by DML statements, TiDB coordinates the priority of DMLs and DDLs during table metadata change, and makes the ongoing DDLs wait for the DMLs with old metadata to commit. In v6.5.0, this feature becomes GA and is enabled by default. It is suitable for various types of DDLs change scenarios.

>     For more information, see [User document](/metadata-lock.md).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    For more information, see [user document](/metadata-lock.md).
```

* Support restoring a cluster to a specific point in time by using `FLASHBACK CLUSTER TO TIMESTAMP` (GA) [#37197](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/37197) [#13303](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/13303) @[Defined2014](https://github.com/Defined2014) @[bb7133](https://github.com/bb7133) @[JmPotato](https://github.com/JmPotato) @[Connor1996](https://github.com/Connor1996) @[HuSharp](https://github.com/HuSharp) @[CalvinNeo](https://github.com/CalvinNeo) **tw@Oreoxmt**

>     TiDB v6.4.0 introduces the [`FLASHBACK CLUSTER TO TIMESTAMP`](/sql-statements/sql-statement-flashback-to-timestamp.md) statement as an experimental feature. You can use this statement to restore a cluster to a specific point in time within the Garbage Collection (GC) life time. In v6.5.0, this statement becomes GA. This feature helps you to easily undo DML misoperations, restore the original cluster in minutes, roll back data at different time points to determine the exact time when data changes, and it is compatible with PITR and TiCDC.

Author: ```suggestion
    TiDB v6.4.0 introduces the [`FLASHBACK CLUSTER TO TIMESTAMP`](/sql-statements/sql-statement-flashback-to-timestamp.md) statement as an experimental feature. You can use this statement to restore a cluster to a specific point in time within the Garbage Collection (GC) life time. In v6.5.0, this feature is now compatible with TiCDC and PITR and becomes GA. This feature helps you to easily undo DML misoperations, restore the original cluster in minutes, and roll back data at different time points to determine the exact time when data changes.
```

Author: @Oreoxmt PTAL

Reviewer 5: LGTM

* Support time to live (TTL) (experimental) [#39262](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/39262) @[lcwangchao](https://github.com/lcwangchao) **tw@ran-huang**

    TTL provides row-level data lifetime management. In TiDB, a table with the TTL attribute automatically checks data lifetime and deletes expired data at the row level. TTL is designed to help you clean up unnecessary data periodically and in a timely manner without affecting the online read and write workloads.

    For more information, see [User document](/time-to-live.md).

* Support saving TiFlash query results using the `INSERT INTO SELECT` statement (experimental) [#37515](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/37515) @[gengliqi](https://github.com/gengliqi) **tw@qiancai**

    Starting from v6.5.0, TiDB supports pushing down the `SELECT` clause (analytical query) of the `INSERT INTO SELECT` statement to TiFlash. In this way, you can easily save the TiFlash query result to a TiDB table specified by `INSERT INTO` for further analysis, which takes effect as result caching (that is, result materialization). For example:

    ```sql
    INSERT INTO t2 SELECT Mod(x,y) FROM t1;
    ```

>     During the experimental phase, this feature is disabled by default. To enable it, you can set the [`tidb_enable_tiflash_read_for_write_stmt`](/system-variables.md#tidb_enable_tiflash_read_for_write_stmt-new-in-v630) system variable to `ON`. There are no special restrictions on the result table specified by `INSERT INTO` for this feature, and you are free to add a TiFlash replica to that result table or not. Typical usage scenarios of this feature include:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    During the experimental phase, this feature is disabled by default. To enable it, you can set the [`tidb_enable_tiflash_read_for_write_stmt`](/system-variables.md#tidb_enable_tiflash_read_for_write_stmt-new-in-v630) system variable to `ON`. There are no special restrictions on the result table specified by `INSERT INTO` for this feature, and you are free to add or not add a TiFlash replica to that result table. Typical usage scenarios of this feature include:
```

    - Run complex analytical queries using TiFlash
    - Reuse TiFlash query results or deal with highly concurrent online requests

>     - Need a relatively small result set comparing with the input data size, preferably smaller than 100MiB.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Need a relatively small result set compared with the input data size, preferably smaller than 100 MiB.
```

* Support binding history execution plans (experimental) [#39199](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/39199) @[fzzf678](https://github.com/fzzf678) **tw@qiancai**

    For a SQL statement, due to various factors during execution, the optimizer might occasionally choose a new execution plan instead of its previous optimal execution plan, and the SQL performance is impacted. In this case, if the optimal execution plan has not been cleared yet, it still exists in the SQL execution history.

    In v6.5.0, TiDB supports binding historical execution plans by extending the binding object in the [`CREATE [GLOBAL | SESSION] BINDING`](/sql-statements/sql-statement-create-binding.md) statement. When the execution plan of a SQL statement changes, you can bind the original execution plan by specifying `plan_digest` in the `CREATE [GLOBAL | SESSION] BINDING` statement to quickly recover SQL performance, as long as the original execution plan is still in the SQL execution history memory table (for example, `statements_summary`). This feature can simplify the process of handling execution plan change issues and improve your maintenance efficiency.

>     For more information, see [user documentation](/sql-plan-management.md#bind-historical-execution-plans).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    For more information, see [user document](/sql-plan-management.md#bind-historical-execution-plans).
```

### Security

* Support the password complexity policy [#38928](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/38928) @[CbcWestwolf](https://github.com/CbcWestwolf) **tw@ran-huang**

    After this policy is enabled, when you set a password, TiDB checks the password length, whether uppercase and lowercase letters, numbers, and special characters in the password are sufficient, whether the password matches the dictionary, and whether the password matches the username. This ensures that you set a secure password.

    TiDB provides the SQL function [`VALIDATE_PASSWORD_STRENGTH()`](https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/5.7/en/encryption-functions.html#function_validate-password-strength) to validate the password strength.

>     For more information, see [User document](/password-management.md#password-complexity-policy).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    For more information, see [user document](/password-management.md#password-complexity-policy).
```

* Support the password expiration policy [#38936](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/38936) @[CbcWestwolf](https://github.com/CbcWestwolf) **tw@ran-huang**

    TiDB supports configuring the password expiration policy, including manual expiration, global-level automatic expiration, and account-level automatic expiration. After this policy is enabled, you must change your passwords periodically. This reduces the risk of password leakage due to long-term use and improves password security.

>     For more information, see [User document](/password-management.md#password-expiration-policy).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    For more information, see [user document](/password-management.md#password-expiration-policy).
```

* Support the password reuse policy [#38937](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/38937) @[keeplearning20221](https://github.com/keeplearning20221) **tw@ran-huang**

    TiDB supports configuring the password reuse policy, including global-level password reuse policy and account-level password reuse policy. After this policy is enabled, you cannot use the passwords that you have used within a specified period or the most recent several passwords that you have used. This reduces the risk of password leakage due to repeated use of passwords and improves password security.

>     For more information, see [User document](/password-management.md#password-reuse-policy).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    For more information, see [user document](/password-management.md#password-reuse-policy).
```

    - The compute work of TiDB Dashboard does not pose pressure on PD nodes. This ensures more stable cluster operation.
    - The user can still access TiDB Dashboard for diagnosis even if the PD node is unavailable.
    - Accessing TiDB Dashboard in Internet does not involve the privileged interfaces of PD. Therefore, the security risk of the cluster is mitigated.

  For more information, see [Deploy TiDB Dashboard independently in TiDB Operator](https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb-in-kubernetes/dev/get-started#deploy-tidb-dashboard-independently).

* Performance Overview dashboard adds TiFlash and CDC (Change Data Capture) panels [#39230](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/39230) @[dbsid](https://github.com/dbsid) **tw@qiancai**

    Since v6.1.0, TiDB has introduced the Performance Overview dashboard in Grafana, which provides a system-level entry for overall performance diagnosis of TiDB, TiKV, and PD. In v6.5.0, the Performance Overview dashboard adds TiFlash and CDC panels. With these panels, starting from v6.5.0, you can use the Performance Overview dashboard to analyze the performance of all components in a TiDB cluster.

>     The TiFlash and CDC panels reorganize with TiFlash and TiCDC monitoring information, which can help you greatly improve the efficiency of analyzing and troubleshooting TiFlash and TiCDC performance issues.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    The TiFlash and CDC panels reorganize the TiFlash and TiCDC monitoring information, which can help you greatly improve the efficiency of analyzing and troubleshooting TiFlash and TiCDC performance issues.
```

    - On the [TiFlash panels](/grafana-performance-overview-dashboard.md#tiflash), you can easily view the request types, latency analysis, and resource usage overview of your TiFlash cluster.

>     - On the [CDC panels](/grafana-performance-overview-dashboard.md#cdc), you can easily view the health, synchronization latency, data flow, and downstream write latency of your TiCDC cluster.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    - On the [CDC panels](/grafana-performance-overview-dashboard.md#cdc), you can easily view the health, replication latency, data flow, and downstream write latency of your TiCDC cluster.
```

>   For more information, see [user document](performance-tuning-method.md).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    For more information, see [user document](/performance-tuning-method.md).
```

    Cost Model Version 2 becomes a generally available feature that significantly improves the overall capability of the TiDB optimizer and helps TiDB evolve towards a more powerful HTAP database.

    For more information, see [User document](/cost-model.md#cost-model-version-2).

* TiFlash 对获取表行数的操作进行针对优化 [#37165](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/37165) @[elsa0520](https://github.com/elsa0520)

    在数据分析的场景中，通过无过滤条件的 `count(*)` 获取表的实际行数是一个常见操作。 TiFlash 在新版本中优化了 `count(*)` 的改写，自动选择带有“非空”属性的数据类型最短的列进行计数， 可以有效降低 TiFlash 上发生的 I/O 数量，进而提升获取表行数的执行效率。

> ### Transaction
> 
> * 功能标题 [#issue号](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)
> 
>     功能描述（需要包含这个功能是什么、在什么场景下对用户有什么价值、怎么用）
> 
>     更多信息，请参考[用户文档](链接)。
> 

Author: ```suggestion
```

### Stability

> * 功能标题 [#issue号](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)
> 
>     功能描述（需要包含这个功能是什么、在什么场景下对用户有什么价值、怎么用）
> 
>     更多信息，请参考[用户文档](链接)。
> 

Author: ```suggestion
```

>     For more information, see [User document](/optimizer-hints.md#hints-that-take-effect-globally).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    For more information, see [user document](/optimizer-hints.md#hints-that-take-effect-globally).
```

>     TiDB v6.2.0 introduces the [Cost Model Version 2](/cost-model.md#cost-model-version-2) as an experimental feature. This model uses a more accurate cost estimation method to help the optimizer choose the optimal execution plan. Especially when TiFlash is deployed, Cost Model Version 2 automatically helps choose the appropriate storage engine and avoids much manual intervention. After real-scene testing for a period of time, this model becomes GA in v6.5.0. Since v6.5.0, newly-created clusters use Cost Model Version 2 by default. For clusters upgrade to v6.5.0, because Cost Model Version 2 might cause changes to query plans, you can set the [`tidb_cost_model_version = 2`](/system-variables.md#tidb_cost_model_version-new-in-v620) variable to use the new cost model after sufficient performance testing.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
    TiDB v6.2.0 introduces the [Cost Model Version 2](/cost-model.md#cost-model-version-2) as an experimental feature. This model uses a more accurate cost estimation method to help the optimizer choose the optimal execution plan. Especially when TiFlash is deployed, Cost Model Version 2 automatically helps choose the appropriate storage engine and avoids much manual intervention. After real-scene testing for a period of time, this model becomes GA in v6.5.0. Since v6.5.0, newly created clusters use Cost Model Version 2 by default. For clusters upgrade to v6.5.0, because Cost Model Version 2 might cause changes to query plans, you can set the [`tidb_cost_model_version = 2`](/system-variables.md#tidb_cost_model_version-new-in-v620) variable to use the new cost model after sufficient performance testing.
```

>     TiDB v6.2.0 introduces the [Cost Model Version 2](/cost-model.md#cost-model-version-2) as an experimental feature. This model uses a more accurate cost estimation method to help the optimizer choose the optimal execution plan. Especially when TiFlash is deployed, Cost Model Version 2 automatically helps choose the appropriate storage engine and avoids much manual intervention. After real-scene testing for a period of time, this model becomes GA in v6.5.0. SInce v6.5.0, newly-created clusters use Cost Model Version 2 by default. For clusters upgrade to v6.5.0, because Cost Model Version 2 might cause changes to query plans, you can set the [`tidb_cost_model_version = 2`](/system-variables.md#tidb_cost_model_version-new-in-v620) variable to use the new cost model after sufficient performance testing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    TiDB v6.2.0 introduces the [Cost Model Version 2](/cost-model.md#cost-model-version-2) as an experimental feature. This model uses a more accurate cost estimation method to help the optimizer choose the optimal execution plan. Especially when TiFlash is deployed, Cost Model Version 2 automatically helps choose the appropriate storage engine and avoids much manual intervention. After real-scene testing for a period of time, this model becomes GA in v6.5.0. Since v6.5.0, newly-created clusters use Cost Model Version 2 by default. For clusters upgrade to v6.5.0, because Cost Model Version 2 might cause changes to query plans, you can set the [`tidb_cost_model_version = 2`](/system-variables.md#tidb_cost_model_version-new-in-v620) variable to use the new cost model after sufficient performance testing.
```

    The `EXPLAIN ANALYZE` statement is used to print execution plans and runtime statistics. In v6.5.0, TiFlash has refined the execution information of the `TableFullScan` operator by adding the DMFile-related execution information. Now the TiFlash data scan status information is presented more intuitively, which helps you analyze TiFlash performance more easily.

    For more information, see [user documentation](sql-statements/sql-statement-explain-analyze.md).

* Support the output of execution plans in the JSON format [#39261](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/39261) @[fzzf678](https://github.com/fzzf678) **tw@ran-huang**

    In v6.5.0, TiDB extends the output format of execution plans. By using `EXPLAIN FORMAT=tidb_json <SQL_statement>`, you can output SQL execution plans in the JSON format. With this capability, SQL debugging tools and diagnostic tools can read execution plans more conveniently and accurately, thus improving the ease of use of SQL diagnosis and tuning.

    For more information, see [user document](/sql-statements/sql-statement-explain.md).

### MySQL compatibility

> * Support a high-performance and globally monotonic `AUTO_INCREMENT` (GA) [#38442](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/38442) @[tiancaiamao](https://github.com/tiancaiamao) **tw@Oreoxmt**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Support a high-performance and globally monotonic `AUTO_INCREMENT` column attribute (GA) [#38442](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/38442) @[tiancaiamao](https://github.com/tiancaiamao) **tw@Oreoxmt**
```

    TiDB v6.4.0 introduces the `AUTO_INCREMENT` MySQL compatibility mode as an experimental feature. This mode introduces a centralized auto-increment ID allocating service that ensures IDs monotonically increase on all TiDB instances. This feature makes it easier to sort query results by auto-increment IDs. In v6.5.0, this feature becomes GA. The insert TPS of a table using this feature is expected to exceed 20,000, and this feature supports elastic scaling to improve the write throughput of a single table and entire clusters. To use the MySQL compatibility mode, you need to set `AUTO_ID_CACHE` to `1` when creating a table. The following is an example:

    ```sql
    CREATE TABLE t(a int AUTO_INCREMENT key) AUTO_ID_CACHE 1;
    ```

    For more information, see [user document](/auto-increment.md#mysql-compatibility-mode).

### Data migration

* Support exporting and importing SQL and CSV files in gzip, snappy, and zstd compression formats [#38514](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/38514) @[lichunzhu](https://github.com/lichunzhu) **tw@hfxsd**

>     Dumpling supports exporting data to compressed SQL and CSV files in the following compression formats: gzip, snappy, and zstd. TiDB Lightning also supports importing compressed files in these formats.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Dumpling supports exporting data to compressed SQL and CSV files in these compression formats: gzip, snappy, and zstd. TiDB Lightning also supports importing compressed files in these formats.
```

* TiCDC supports bidirectional replication across multiple clusters  @[asddongmen](https://github.com/asddongmen) **tw@shichun-0415**

    TiCDC supports bidirectional replication across multiple TiDB clusters. If you need a multi-master TiDB solution for your application, especially a multi-master solution in multiple regions, you can use this feature to build one. By configuring the `bdr-mode = true` parameter for the TiCDC changefeeds from each TiDB cluster to other TiDB clusters, you can achieve bidirectional data replication across multiple TiDB clusters.

    For more information, refer to [user document](/ticdc/ticdc-bidirectional-replication.md).

* TiCDC performance improves significantly **tw@shichun-0415

    In a test scenario of the TiDB cluster, the performance of TiCDC improved significantly. Specifically, the maximum row changes that a single TiCDC can process reaches 30K rows/s, and the replication latency is reduced to 10s. Even in TiKV and TiCDC rolling upgrade, the replication latency is less than 30s. In a disaster recovery (DR) scenario, when the throughput is xx rows/s, the replication latency in DR can be maintained at x s.

> ### 部署及运维
> 
> * 功能标题 [#issue号](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)
> 
>     功能描述（需要包含这个功能是什么、在什么场景下对用户有什么价值、怎么用）
> 
>     更多信息，请参考[用户文档](链接)。
> 

Author: ```suggestion
```

>     The storage sink supports changed logs in the canal-json and CSV formats. Noticeably, the latency of replicating changed logs from TiCDC to storage can be as short as xx. For more information, see [User document](/ticdc/ticdc-sink-to-cloud-storage.md).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    The storage sink supports changed logs in the canal-json and CSV formats. Noticeably, the latency of replicating changed logs from TiCDC to storage can be as low as xx. For more information, see [User document](/ticdc/ticdc-sink-to-cloud-storage.md).
```

    TiDB snapshot backup supports resuming backup from a checkpoint. When Backup & Restore (BR) encounters a recoverable error, it retries backup. However, BR exits if the retry fails for several times. The checkpoint backup feature allows for longer recoverable failures to be retried, for example, a network failure of tens of minutes.

    Note that if you do not recover the system from a failure within one hour after BR exits, the snapshot data to be backed up might be recycled by the GC mechanism, causing the backup to fail. For more information, see [documentation](/br/br-checkpoint.md).

* PITR performance improved remarkably **tw@shichun-0415

>     In the log restore stage, the restore speed of one TiKV can reach xx MB/s, which is x times faster than before. The restore speed is scalable and the RTO in DR scenarios is reduced greatly. The RPO in DR scenarios can be as short as 5 minutes. In normal cluster operation and maintenance (OM), for example, a rolling upgrade is performed or only one TiKV is down, the RPO can be 5 minutes.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    In the log restore stage, the restore speed of one TiKV can reach 9 MiB/s, which is 50% faster than before. The restore speed is scalable and the RTO in DR scenarios is reduced greatly. The RPO in DR scenarios can be as short as 5 minutes. In normal cluster operation and maintenance (OM), for example, a rolling upgrade is performed or only one TiKV is down, the RPO can be 5 minutes.
```

* TiKV-BR GA: Supports backing up and restoring RawKV [#67](https://github.com/tikv/migration/issues/67) @[pingyu](https://github.com/pingyu) @[haojinming](https://github.com/haojinming) **tw@shichun-0415**

    TiKV-BR is a backup and restore tool used in TiKV clusters. TiKV and PD can constitute a KV database when used without TiDB, which is called RawKV. TiKV-BR supports data backup and restore for products that use RawKV. TiKV-BR can also upgrade the [`api-version`](/tikv-configuration-file.md#api-version-new-in-v610) from `API V1` to `API V2` for TiKV cluster.

    For more information, see [User document](https://tikv.org/docs/latest/concepts/explore-tikv-features/backup-restore/).

## Compatibility changes

### System variables

| Variable name | Change type | Description |
|--------|------------------------------|------|
|[`tidb_enable_amend_pessimistic_txn`](/system-variables.md#tidb_enable_amend_pessimistic_txn-new-in-v407)| Deprecated | Starting from v6.5.0, this variable is deprecated, and TiDB uses the [Metadata Lock](/metadata-lock.md) feature by default to avoid the `Information schema is changed` error. |

> | [`tidb_enable_outer_join_reorder`](/system-variables.md#tidb_enable_outer_join_reorder-new-in-v610) | Modified | Changes the default value from `OFF` to `ON`, meaning that the support of Outer Join for the [Join Reorder](/join-reorder.md) algorithm is enabled by default. |

Author: ```suggestion
| [`tidb_enable_outer_join_reorder`](/system-variables.md#tidb_enable_outer_join_reorder-new-in-v610) | Modified | Changes the default value from `OFF` to `ON` after further tests, meaning that the support of Outer Join for the [Join Reorder](/join-reorder.md) algorithm is enabled by default. |
```

> | [`tidb_cost_model_version`](/system-variables.md#tidb_cost_model_version-introduced-new-in-v620) | Modified | Changes the default value from `1` to `2`, meaning that Cost Model Version 2 is used for index selection and operator selection by default.  |

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
| [`tidb_cost_model_version`](/system-variables.md#tidb_cost_model_version-introduced-new-in-v620) | Modified | After further testing, the default value is changed from `1` to `2`, meaning that Cost Model Version 2 is used for index selection and operator selection by default.  |
```

> | [`tidb_enable_metadata_lock`](/system-variables.md#tidb_enable_metadata_lock-new-in-v630) | Modified | Changes the default value from `OFF` to `ON`, meaning that the metadata lock feature is enabled by default. |

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
| [`tidb_enable_metadata_lock`](/system-variables.md#tidb_enable_metadata_lock-new-in-v630) | Modified | After further testing, the default value is changed from `OFF` to `ON`, meaning that the metadata lock feature is enabled by default. |
```

| [`tidb_enable_tiflash_read_for_write_stmt`](/system-variables.md#tidb_enable_tiflash_read_for_write_stmt-new-in-v630) | Modified | Takes effect starting from v6.5.0. It controls whether read operations in SQL statements containing `INSERT`, `DELETE`, and `UPDATE` can be pushed down to TiFlash. The default value is `OFF`. |

> | [`tidb_ddl_enable_fast_reorg`](/system-variables.md#tidb_ddl_enable_fast_reorg-new-in-v630) | Modified | Changes the default value from `OFF` to `ON`, meaning that the acceleration of `ADD INDEX` and `CREATE INDEX` is enabled by default. |

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
| [`tidb_ddl_enable_fast_reorg`](/system-variables.md#tidb_ddl_enable_fast_reorg-new-in-v630) | Modified | After further testing, the default value is changed from `OFF` to `ON`, meaning that the acceleration of `ADD INDEX` and `CREATE INDEX` is enabled by default. |
```

> | [`tidb_mem_quota_query`](/system-variables.md#tidb_mem_quota_query) | Modified | For versions earlier than TiDB v6.5.0, this variable is used to set the threshold value of memory quota for a query. For TiDB v6.5.0 and later versions, this variable is used to set the threshold value of memory quota for a session.  |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| [`tidb_mem_quota_query`](/system-variables.md#tidb_mem_quota_query) | Modified | For versions earlier than TiDB v6.5.0, this variable is used to set the threshold value of memory quota for a query. For TiDB v6.5.0 and later versions, to control the memory of DML statements more accurately, this variable is used to set the threshold value of memory quota for a session.  |
```

> | [`tidb_replica_read`](/system-variables.md#tidb_replica_read-new-in-v40) | Modified | Starting from v6.5.0, when this variable is set to`closest-adaptive` and the estimated result of a read request is greater than or equal to [`tidb_adaptive_closest_read_threshold`](/system-variables.md#tidb_adaptive_closest_read_threshold-new-in-v630), the number of TiDB nodes whose `closest-adaptive` configuration takes effect is limited in each availability zone, which is always the same as the number of TiDB nodes in the availability zone with the fewest TiDB nodes, and the other TiDB nodes automatically read from the leader replica. |

Author: ```suggestion
| [`tidb_replica_read`](/system-variables.md#tidb_replica_read-new-in-v40) | Modified | Starting from v6.5.0, to optimize load balancing across TiDB nodes, when this variable is set to`closest-adaptive` and the estimated result of a read request is greater than or equal to [`tidb_adaptive_closest_read_threshold`](/system-variables.md#tidb_adaptive_closest_read_threshold-new-in-v630), the number of TiDB nodes whose `closest-adaptive` configuration takes effect is limited in each availability zone, which is always the same as the number of TiDB nodes in the availability zone with the fewest TiDB nodes, and the other TiDB nodes automatically read from the leader replica. |
```

> | [`tidb_server_memory_limit`](/system-variables.md#tidb_server_memory_limit-new-in-v640) | Modified | Changes the default value from `0` to `80%`, meaning that the memory limit for a TiDB instance is 80% of the total memory by default. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| [`tidb_server_memory_limit`](/system-variables.md#tidb_server_memory_limit-new-in-v640) | Modified | Changes the default value from `0` to `80%`. As the TiDB global memory control becomes GA, this default value change enables the memory control by default and sets the memory limit for a TiDB instance to 80% of the total memory by default. |
```

| [`default_password_lifetime`](/system-variables.md#default_password_lifetime-new-in-v650) | Newly added | Sets the global policy for automatic password expiration to require users to change passwords periodically. The default value `0` indicates that passwords never expire. |
| [`disconnect_on_expired_password`](/system-variables.md#disconnect_on_expired_password-new-in-v650) | Newly added | Indicates whether TiDB disconnects the client connection when the password is expired. This variable is read-only. |
| [`password_history`](/system-variables.md#password_history-new-in-v650) | Newly added | This variable is used to establish a password reuse policy that allows TiDB to limit password reuse based on the number of password changes. The default value `0` means disabling the password reuse policy based on the number of password changes. |

> | [`password_reuse_interval`](/system-variables.md#password_reuse_interval-new-in-v650) | Newly added | This variable is used to establish a password reuse policy that allows TiDB to limit password reuse based on time elapsed. The default value `0` means disabling the password reuse policy based on time elapsed. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| [`password_reuse_interval`](/system-variables.md#password_reuse_interval-new-in-v650) | Newly added | This variable is used to establish a password reuse policy that allows TiDB to limit password reuse based on time elapsed. The default value `0` means disabling the password reuse policy based on time elapsed. |
| [`tidb_auto_build_stats_concurrency`](/system-variables.md#tidb_auto_build_stats_concurrency-new-in-v650) | Newly added | This variable is used to set the concurrency of executing the automatic update of statistics. The default value is `1`.  |
```

| [`tidb_ttl_job_schedule_window_end_time`](/system-variables.md#tidb_ttl_job_schedule_window_end_time-new-in-v650) | Newly added | This variable is used to control the end time of the scheduling window of the TTL job in the background. When you modify the value of this variable, be cautious that a small window might cause the cleanup of expired data to fail. |
| [`tidb_ttl_scan_batch_size`](/system-variables.md#tidb_ttl_scan_batch_size-new-in-v650) | Newly added | This variable is used to set the `LIMIT` value of each `SELECT` statement used to scan expired data in a TTL job. |
| [`tidb_ttl_scan_worker_count`](/system-variables.md#tidb_ttl_scan_worker_count-new-in-v650) | Newly added | This variable is used to set the maximum concurrency of TTL scan jobs on each TiDB node. |
| [`validate_password.check_user_name`](/system-variables.md#validate_passwordcheck_user_name-new-in-v650) | Newly added | A check item in the password complexity check. It checks whether the password matches the username. This variable takes effect only when [`validate_password.enable`](/system-variables.md#validate_passwordenable-new-in-v650) is enabled. The default value is `ON`. |

> | [`validate_password.dictionary`](/system-variables.md#validate_passworddictionary-new-in-v650) | Newly added | A check item in the password complexity check. It checks whether the password matches the dictionary. This variable takes effect only when [`validate_password.enable`](/system-variables.md#validate_passwordenable-new-in-v650) is enabled and [`validate_password.policy`](/system-variables.md#validate_passwordpolicy-new-in-v650) is set to `2` (STRONG). The default value is `""`. |

Author: ```suggestion
| [`validate_password.dictionary`](/system-variables.md#validate_passworddictionary-new-in-v650) | Newly added | A check item in the password complexity check. It checks whether the password matches any word in the dictionary. This variable takes effect only when [`validate_password.enable`](/system-variables.md#validate_passwordenable-new-in-v650) is enabled and [`validate_password.policy`](/system-variables.md#validate_passwordpolicy-new-in-v650) is set to `2` (STRONG). The default value is `""`. |
```

| [`validate_password.enable`](/system-variables.md#validate_passwordenable-new-in-v650) | Newly added | This variable controls whether to perform password complexity check. If this variable is set to `ON`, TiDB performs the password complexity check when you set a password. The default value is `OFF`. |

> | [`validate_password.length`](/system-variables.md#validate_passwordlength-new-in-v650) | Newly added | A check item in the password complexity check. It checks whether the password length is sufficient. By default, the minimum password length is `8`. This variable takes effect only when [`validate_password.enable`](/system-variables.md#validate_passwordenable-new-in-v650) is enabled. The default value is `8`. |

Author: ```suggestion
| [`validate_password.length`](/system-variables.md#validate_passwordlength-new-in-v650) | Newly added | A check item in the password complexity check. It checks whether the password length is sufficient. By default, the minimum password length is `8`. This variable takes effect only when [`validate_password.enable`](/system-variables.md#validate_passwordenable-new-in-v650) is enabled. |
```

> | [`tidb_source_id`](/system-variables.md#tidb_source_id-new-in-v650) | Newly added | This variable is used to configure the different cluster IDs in a [bi-directional replication](/ticdc/manage-ticdc.md#bi-directional-replication) cluster.|

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| [`tidb_source_id`](/system-variables.md#tidb_source_id-new-in-v650) | Newly added | This variable is used to configure the different cluster IDs in a [bi-directional replication](/ticdc/manage-ticdc.md#bi-directional-replication) cluster.|
| [`tidb_sysproc_scan_concurrency`](/system-variables.md#tidb_sysproc_scan_concurrency-new-in-v650) | Newly added | This variable is used to set the concurrency of scan operations performed when TiDB executes internal SQL statements (such as an automatic update of statistics). The default value is `1`. |
```

| [`validate_password.mixed_case_count`](/system-variables.md#validate_passwordmixed_case_count-new-in-v650) | Newly added | A check item in the password complexity check. It checks whether the password contains sufficient uppercase and lowercase letters. This variable takes effect only when [`validate_password.enable`](/system-variables.md#validate_passwordenable-new-in-v650) is enabled and [`validate_password.policy`](/system-variables.md#validate_passwordpolicy-new-in-v650) is set to `1` (MEDIUM) or larger. The default value is `1`. |
| [`validate_password.number_count`](/system-variables.md#validate_passwordnumber_count-new-in-v650) | Newly added | A check item in the password complexity check. It checks whether the password contains sufficient numbers. This variable takes effect only when [`validate_password.enable`](/system-variables.md#password_reuse_interval-new-in-v650) is enabled and [`validate_password.policy`](/system-variables.md#validate_passwordpolicy-new-in-v650) is set to `1` (MEDIUM) or larger. The default value is `1`. |

> | [`validate_password.policy`](/system-variables.md#validate_passwordpolicy-new-in-v650) | Newly added | This variable controls the policy for the password complexity check. This variable takes effect only when [`validate_password.enable`](/system-variables.md#password_reuse_interval-new-in-v650) is enabled. The default value is `1`. |

Author: ```suggestion
| [`validate_password.policy`](/system-variables.md#validate_passwordpolicy-new-in-v650) | Newly added | This variable controls the policy for the password complexity check. The value can be `0`, `1`, or `2` (corresponds to LOW, MEDIUM, or STRONG). This variable takes effect only when [`validate_password.enable`](/system-variables.md#password_reuse_interval-new-in-v650) is enabled. The default value is `1`. |
```

### Configuration file parameters

| Configuration file | Configuration parameter | Change type | Description |
| -------- | -------- | -------- | -------- |
| TiDB | [`server-memory-quota`](/tidb-configuration-file.md#server-memory-quota-new-in-v409) | Deprecated | Since v6.5.0, this configuration item is deprecated. Instead, use the system variable [`tidb_server_memory_limit`](/system-variables.md#tidb_server_memory_limit-new-in-v640) to manage memory globally. |
| TiDB | [`disconnect-on-expired-password`](/tidb-configuration-file.md#disconnect-on-expired-password-new-in-v650) | Newly added | Determines whether TiDB disconnects the client connection when the password is expired. The default value is `true`, which means the client connection is disconnected when the password is expired. |
| TiKV | `raw-min-ts-outlier-threshold` | Deleted | Since v6.4.0, this configuration item was deprecated. Since v6.5.0, this configuration item is deleted. |

> | TiKV | [`cdc.min-ts-interval`](/tikv-configuration-file.md#min-ts-interval)  | Modified | Change the default value from `1s` to `200ms`. |

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
| TiKV | [`cdc.min-ts-interval`](/tikv-configuration-file.md#min-ts-interval)  | Modified | To reduce CDC latency, the default value is changed from `1s` to `200ms`. |
```

    - Optimize scheduler performance for large-scale clusters and accelerate the production of scheduling policies [#5473](https://github.com/tikv/pd/issues/5473) @[bufferflies](https://github.com/bufferflies)
    - Improve the speed of loading Regions [#5606](https://github.com/tikv/pd/issues/5606) @[rleungx](https://github.com/rleungx)
    - Reduce unnecessary overhead by optimized handling of Region heartbeats [#5648](https://github.com/tikv/pd/issues/5648)@[rleungx](https://github.com/rleungx)
    - Add the feature of automatically garbage collecting tombstone stores [#5348](https://github.com/tikv/pd/issues/5348) @[nolouch](https://github.com/nolouch)

+ TiFlash

    - Improve write performance in scenarios where there is no batch processing on the SQL side [#6404](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflash/issues/6404) @[lidezhu](https://github.com/lidezhu)
    - Add more details for TableFullScan in the `explain analyze` output [#5926](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflash/issues/5926) @[hongyunyan](https://github.com/hongyunyan)

+ Tools

    + TiDB Dashboard

>         - Add three new fields to the slow query page: "Is Prepared?"，"Is Plan from Cache?"，"Is Plan from Binding?" [#1451](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb-dashboard/issues/1451) @[shhdgit](https://github.com/shhdgit)

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
        - Add three new fields to the slow query page: "Is Prepared?", "Is Plan from Cache?", "Is Plan from Binding?" [#1451](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb-dashboard/issues/1451) @[shhdgit](https://github.com/shhdgit)
```

    - Fix the issue that using `INSERT IGNORE INTO` to insert data of the `STRING` type into an auto-increment column of the `SMALLINT` type will cause an error [#38483](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/38483) @[hawkingrei](https://github.com/hawkingrei)
    - Fix the issue that the null pointer error occurs in the operation of renaming the partition column of a partitioned table [#38932](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/38932) @[mjonss](https://github.com/mjonss)
    - Fix the issue that modifying the partition column of a partitioned table causes DDL to hang [#38530](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/38530) @[mjonss](https://github.com/mjonss)
    - Fix the issue that the `ADMIN SHOW JOB` operation panics after upgrading from v4.0.16 to v6.4.0 [#38980](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/38980) @[tangenta](https://github.com/tangenta)
    - Fix the issue that the `tidb_decode_key` function fails to correctly parse the encoding of partitioned tables [#39304](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/39304) @[Defined2014](https://github.com/Defined2014)

>     - Fixe the issue that gRPC error logs are not redirected to the correct log file during log rotation [#38941](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/38941) @[xhebox](https://github.com/xhebox)

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
    - Fix the issue that gRPC error logs are not redirected to the correct log file during log rotation [#38941](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/38941) @[xhebox](https://github.com/xhebox)
```

    For more information, see [documentation](/dm/dm-continuous-data-validation.md).

### TiDB data share subscription

* TiCDC supports replicating changed logs to storage sinks (experimental) [tiflow#6797](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/6797) @[zhaoxinyu](https://github.com/zhaoxinyu) **tw@shichun-0415**

     TiCDC supports replicating changed logs to Amazon S3, Azure Blob Storage, NFS, and other S3-compatible storage services. Cloud storage is reasonably priced and easy to use. If you do not want to use Kafka, you can use storage sinks. TiCDC saves the changed logs to a file and then sends it to the storage system. From the storage system, the consumer program reads the newly generated changed log files periodically.

    The storage sink supports changed logs in the canal-json and CSV formats. Noticeably, the latency of replicating changed logs from TiCDC to storage can be as short as xx. For more information, see [documentation](/ticdc/ticdc-sink-to-cloud-storage.md).

> * TiCDC supports bidirectional replication across multiple clusters @[asddongmen](https://github.com/asddongmen) **tw@shichun-0415**

Author: ```suggestion
* TiCDC supports bidirectional replication across multiple clusters [#38587](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/38587) @[xiongjiwei](https://github.com/xiongjiwei) @[asddongmen](https://github.com/asddongmen) **tw@ran-huang**
```

- The [index acceleration](/system-variables.md#tidb_ddl_enable_fast_reorg-new-in-v630) feature becomes generally available (GA), which improves the performance of adding indexes by about 10 times compared with v6.1.0.
- The TiDB global memory control becomes GA, and you can control the memory consumption threshold via [`tidb_server_memory_limit`](/system-variables.md#tidb_server_memory_limit-new-in-v640).
- The high-performance and globally monotonic [`AUTO_INCREMENT`](/auto-increment.md#mysql-compatible-mode) column attribute becomes GA, which is compatible with MySQL.
- [`FLASHBACK CLUSTER TO TIMESTAMP`](/sql-statements/sql-statement-flashback-to-timestamp.md) is now compatible with TiCDC and PITR and becomes GA.
- Enhance TiDB optimizer by making the more accurate [Cost Model version 2](/cost-model.md#cost-model-version-2) generally available and supporting expressions connected by `AND` for [INDEX MERGE](/explain-index-merge.md).
- Support pushing down the `JSON_EXTRACT()` function to TiFlash.
- Support [password management](/password-management.md) policies that meet password compliance auditing requirements.

> - TiDB Lightning and Dumpling support [importing](tidb-lightning/tidb-lightning-data-source.md) and [exporting](/dumpling-overview.md#improve-export-efficiency-through-concurrency) compressed SQL and CSV files.

Author: ```suggestion
- TiDB Lightning and Dumpling support [importing](/tidb-lightning/tidb-lightning-data-source.md) and [exporting](/dumpling-overview.md#improve-export-efficiency-through-concurrency) compressed SQL and CSV files.
```

- TiDB Data Migration (DM) [continuous data validation](/dm/dm-continuous-data-validation.md) becomes GA.

> - TiDB Backup & Restore supports snapshot checkpoint backup, improves the recovery performance of [PITR](/br-pitr-guide.md#carry-pitr) by 50%, and reduces the RPO to as short as 5 minutes.

Author: ```suggestion
- TiDB Backup & Restore supports snapshot checkpoint backup, improves the recovery performance of [PITR](/br/br-pitr-guide.md#carry-pitr) by 50%, and reduces the RPO to as short as 5 minutes.
```

* Performance Overview dashboard adds TiFlash and CDC (Change Data Capture) panels [#39230](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/39230) @[dbsid](https://github.com/dbsid) **tw@qiancai**

    Since v6.1.0, TiDB has introduced the Performance Overview dashboard in Grafana, which provides a system-level entry for overall performance diagnosis of TiDB, TiKV, and PD. In v6.5.0, the Performance Overview dashboard adds TiFlash and CDC panels. With these panels, starting from v6.5.0, you can use the Performance Overview dashboard to analyze the performance of all components in a TiDB cluster.

    The TiFlash and CDC panels reorganize the TiFlash and TiCDC monitoring information, which can help you greatly improve the efficiency of analyzing and troubleshooting TiFlash and TiCDC performance issues.

    - On the [TiFlash panels](/grafana-performance-overview-dashboard.md#tiflash), you can easily view the request types, latency analysis, and resource usage overview of your TiFlash cluster.
    - On the [CDC panels](/grafana-performance-overview-dashboard.md#cdc), you can easily view the health, replication latency, data flow, and downstream write latency of your TiCDC cluster.

>   For more information, see [documentation](/performance-tuning-method.md).

Author: ```suggestion
  For more information, see [documentation](/performance-tuning-methods.md).
```

### Performance

* [INDEX MERGE](/glossary.md#index-merge) supports expressions connected by `AND` [#39333](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/39333) @[guo-shaoge](https://github.com/guo-shaoge) @[time-and-fate](https://github.com/time-and-fate) @[hailanwhu](https://github.com/hailanwhu) **tw@TomShawn**

    Before v6.5.0, TiDB only supported using index merge for the filter conditions connected by `OR`. Starting from v6.5.0, TiDB has supported using index merge for filter conditions connected by `AND` in the `WHERE` clause. In this way, the index merge of TiDB can now cover more general combinations of query filter conditions and is no longer limited to union (`OR`) relationship. The current v6.5.0 version only supports index merge under `OR` conditions as automatically selected by the optimizer. To enable index merge for `AND` conditions, you need to use the [`USE_INDEX_MERGE`](/optimizer-hints.md#use_index_merget1_name-idx1_name--idx2_name-) hint.

>     For more details about index merge, see [v5.4.0 Release Notes](/release-5.4.0#performance) and [Explain Index Merge](/explain-index-merge.md).

Author: ```suggestion
    For more details about index merge, see [v5.4.0 Release Notes](/release-5.4.0.md#performance) and [Explain Index Merge](/explain-index-merge.md).
```

>     For more details about index merge, see [v5.4.0 Release Notes](/release-5.4.0.md#performance) and [Explain Index Merge](/explain-index-merge.md).

Author: ```suggestion
    For more details about index merge, see [v5.4.0 Release Notes](/releases/release-5.4.0.md#performance) and [Explain Index Merge](/explain-index-merge.md).
```

    If you are using TiDB v6.5.0 or later, it is recommended to remove [`txn-total-size-limit`](/tidb-configuration-file.md#txn-total-size-limit) and not to set a separate limit on the memory usage of transactions. Instead, use the system variables [`tidb_mem_quota_query`](/system-variables.md#tidb_mem_quota_query) and [`tidb_server_memory_limit`](/system-variables.md#tidb_server_memory_limit-new-in-v640) to manage global memory, which can improve the efficiency of memory usage.

    For more information, see [documentation](/configure-memory-usage.md).

### Ease of use

* Refine the execution information of the TiFlash `TableFullScan` operator in the `EXPLAIN ANALYZE` output [#5926](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflash/issues/5926) @[hongyunyan](https://github.com/hongyunyan) **tw@qiancai**

    The `EXPLAIN ANALYZE` statement is used to print execution plans and runtime statistics. In v6.5.0, TiFlash has refined the execution information of the `TableFullScan` operator by adding the DMFile-related execution information. Now the TiFlash data scan status information is presented more intuitively, which helps you analyze TiFlash performance more easily.

>     For more information, see [documentation](sql-statements/sql-statement-explain-analyze.md).

Author: ```suggestion
    For more information, see [documentation](/sql-statements/sql-statement-explain-analyze.md).
```

* Continuous data validation in DM is GA [#4426](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/4426) @[D3Hunter](https://github.com/D3Hunter) **tw@hfxsd**

    In the process of migrating incremental data from upstream to downstream databases, there is a small probability that data flow might cause errors or data loss. In scenarios where strong data consistency is required, such as credit and securities businesses, you can perform a full volume checksum on the data after migration to ensure data consistency. However, in some incremental replication scenarios, upstream and downstream writes are continuous and uninterrupted because the upstream and downstream data is constantly changing, making it difficult to perform consistency checks on all data.

    Previously, you needed to interrupt the business to validate the full data, which would affect your business. Now, with this feature, you can perform incremental data validation without interrupting the business.

    For more information, see [documentation](/dm/dm-continuous-data-validation.md).

### TiDB data share subscription

> * TiCDC supports replicating changed logs to storage sinks (experimental) [tiflow#6797](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/6797) @[zhaoxinyu](https://github.com/zhaoxinyu) **tw@shichun-0415**

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* TiCDC supports replicating changed logs to storage sinks (experimental) [#6797](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/6797) @[zhaoxinyu](https://github.com/zhaoxinyu) **tw@shichun-0415**
```

    For more information, see [documentation](https://tikv.org/docs/latest/concepts/explore-tikv-features/backup-restore/).

## Compatibility changes

### System variables

| Variable name | Change type | Description |
|--------|------------------------------|------|
|[`tidb_enable_amend_pessimistic_txn`](/system-variables.md#tidb_enable_amend_pessimistic_txn-new-in-v407)| Deprecated | Starting from v6.5.0, this variable is deprecated, and TiDB uses the [Metadata Lock](/metadata-lock.md) feature by default to avoid the `Information schema is changed` error. |
| [`tidb_enable_outer_join_reorder`](/system-variables.md#tidb_enable_outer_join_reorder-new-in-v610) | Modified | Changes the default value from `OFF` to `ON` after further tests, meaning that the support of Outer Join for the [Join Reorder](/join-reorder.md) algorithm is enabled by default. |

> | [`tidb_cost_model_version`](/system-variables.md#tidb_cost_model_version-introduced-new-in-v620) | Modified | Changes the default value from `1` to `2` after further tests, meaning that Cost Model Version 2 is used for index selection and operator selection by default.  |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| [`tidb_cost_model_version`](/system-variables.md#tidb_cost_model_version-introduced-new-in-v620) | Modified | Changes the default value from `1` to `2` after further tests, meaning that Cost Model Version 2 is used for index selection and operator selection by default.  |
| [`tidb_enable_gc_aware_memory_track`](/system-variables#tidb_enable_gc_aware_memory_track)  |  Modified |   Changes the default value from `ON` to `OFF`. Because the GC-aware memory track is found inaccurate in tests and causes too large analyzed memory size tracked, the memory track is disabled. In addition, in Golang 1.19, the memory tracked by the GC-aware memory track does not have much impact on the overall memory.  |
```

| [`password_reuse_interval`](/system-variables.md#password_reuse_interval-new-in-v650) | Newly added | This variable is used to establish a password reuse policy that allows TiDB to limit password reuse based on time elapsed. The default value `0` means disabling the password reuse policy based on time elapsed. |
| [`tidb_auto_build_stats_concurrency`](/system-variables.md#tidb_auto_build_stats_concurrency-new-in-v650) | Newly added | This variable is used to set the concurrency of executing the automatic update of statistics. The default value is `1`.  |
| [`tidb_cdc_write_source`](/system-variables.md#tidb_cdc_write_source-new-in-v650) | Newly added | When this variable is set to a value other than 0, data written in this session is considered to be written by TiCDC. This variable can only be modified by TiCDC. Do not manually modify this variable in any case. |
| [`tidb_index_merge_intersection_concurrency`](/system-variables.md#tidb_index_merge_intersection_concurrency-new-in-v650) | Newly added | Sets the maximum concurrency for the intersection operations that index merge performs. It is effective only when TiDB accesses partitioned tables in the dynamic pruning mode. |

> | [`tidb_source_id`](/system-variables.md#tidb_source_id-new-in-v650) | Newly added | This variable is used to configure the different cluster IDs in a [bi-directional replication](/ticdc/manage-ticdc.md#bi-directional-replication) cluster.|

Author: ```suggestion
| [`tidb_source_id`](/system-variables.md#tidb_source_id-new-in-v650) | Newly added | This variable is used to configure the different cluster IDs in a [bi-directional replication](/ticdc/ticdc-bidirectional-replication.md) cluster.|
```

---
title: TiDB 6.5.0 Release Notes
---

# TiDB 6.5.0 Release Notes

Release date: December 29, 2022

TiDB version: 6.5.0

Quick access: [Quick start](https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/v6.5/quick-start-with-tidb) | [Production deployment](https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/v6.5/production-deployment-using-tiup) | [Installation packages](https://www.pingcap.com/download/?version=v6.5.0#version-list)

TiDB 6.5.0 is a Long-Term Support Release (LTS).

Compared with the previous LTS 6.1.0, 6.5.0 not only includes new features, improvements, and bug fixes released in [6.2.0-DMR](/releases/release-6.2.0.md), [6.3.0-DMR](/releases/release-6.3.0.md), [6.4.0-DMR](/releases/release-6.4.0.md), but also introduces the following key features and improvements:

- The [index acceleration](/system-variables.md#tidb_ddl_enable_fast_reorg-new-in-v630) feature becomes generally available (GA), which improves the performance of adding indexes by about 10 times compared with v6.1.0.
- The TiDB global memory control becomes GA, and you can control the memory consumption threshold via [`tidb_server_memory_limit`](/system-variables.md#tidb_server_memory_limit-new-in-v640).

> - The high-performance and globally monotonic [`AUTO_INCREMENT`](/auto-increment.md#mysql-compatible-mode) column attribute becomes GA, which is compatible with MySQL.

Author: ```suggestion
- The high-performance and globally monotonic [`AUTO_INCREMENT`](/auto-increment.md#mysql-compatibility-mode) column attribute becomes GA, which is compatible with MySQL.
```

- [`FLASHBACK CLUSTER TO TIMESTAMP`](/sql-statements/sql-statement-flashback-to-timestamp.md) is now compatible with TiCDC and PITR and becomes GA.
- Enhance TiDB optimizer by making the more accurate [Cost Model version 2](/cost-model.md#cost-model-version-2) generally available and supporting expressions connected by `AND` for [INDEX MERGE](/explain-index-merge.md).
- Support pushing down the `JSON_EXTRACT()` function to TiFlash.
- Support [password management](/password-management.md) policies that meet password compliance auditing requirements.
- TiDB Lightning and Dumpling support [importing](/tidb-lightning/tidb-lightning-data-source.md) and [exporting](/dumpling-overview.md#improve-export-efficiency-through-concurrency) compressed SQL and CSV files.
- TiDB Data Migration (DM) [continuous data validation](/dm/dm-continuous-data-validation.md) becomes GA.

> - TiDB Backup & Restore supports snapshot checkpoint backup, improves the recovery performance of [PITR](/br/br-pitr-guide.md#carry-pitr) by 50%, and reduces the RPO to as short as 5 minutes.

Author: ```suggestion
- TiDB Backup & Restore supports snapshot checkpoint backup, improves the recovery performance of [PITR](/br/br-pitr-guide.md#run-pitr) by 50%, and reduces the RPO to as short as 5 minutes.
```

- Improve the TiCDC throughput of [replicating data to Kafka](/replicate-data-to-kafka.md) from 4000 rows/s to 35000 rows/s, and reduce the replication latency to 2s.
- Provide row-level [Time to live (TTL)](/time-to-live.md) to manage data lifecycle (experimental).
- TiCDC supports [replicating changed logs to object storage](/ticdc/ticdc-sink-to-cloud-storage.md) such as Amazon S3, Azure Blob Storage, and NFS (experimental).

## New features

### SQL

> * The performance of TiDB adding indexes is improved by 10 times (GA) [#35983](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/35983) @[benjamin2037](https://github.com/benjamin2037) @[tangenta](https://github.com/tangenta)

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
* The performance of TiDB adding indexes is improved by about 10 times (GA) [#35983](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/35983) @[benjamin2037](https://github.com/benjamin2037) @[tangenta](https://github.com/tangenta)
```

>     TiDB v6.3.0 introduces the [Add index acceleration](/system-variables.md#tidb_ddl_enable_fast_reorg-new-in-v630) as an experimental feature to improve the speed of backfilling when creating an index. In v6.5.0, this feature becomes GA and is enabled by default, and the performance on large tables is expected to be 10 times faster. The acceleration feature is suitable for scenarios where a single SQL statement adds an index serially. When multiple SQL statements add indexes in parallel, only one of the SQL statements will be accelerated.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
    TiDB v6.3.0 introduces the [Add index acceleration](/system-variables.md#tidb_ddl_enable_fast_reorg-new-in-v630) as an experimental feature to improve the speed of backfilling when creating an index. In v6.5.0, this feature becomes GA and is enabled by default, and the performance on large tables is expected to be about 10 times faster. The acceleration feature is suitable for scenarios where a single SQL statement adds an index serially. When multiple SQL statements add indexes in parallel, only one of the SQL statements will be accelerated.
```

* Provide lightweight metadata lock to improve the DML success rate during DDL change (GA) [#37275](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/37275) @[wjhuang2016](https://github.com/wjhuang2016)

>     TiDB v6.3.0 introduces [Metadata lock](/metadata-lock.md) as an experimental feature. To avoid the `Information schema is changed` error caused by DML statements, TiDB coordinates the priority of DMLs and DDLs during table metadata change, and makes the ongoing DDLs wait for the DMLs with old metadata to commit. In v6.5.0, this feature becomes GA and is enabled by default. It is suitable for various types of DDLs change scenarios.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
    TiDB v6.3.0 introduces [Metadata lock](/metadata-lock.md) as an experimental feature. To avoid the `Information schema is changed` error caused by DML statements, TiDB coordinates the priority of DMLs and DDLs during table metadata change, and makes the ongoing DDLs wait for the DMLs with old metadata to commit. In v6.5.0, this feature becomes GA and is enabled by default. It is suitable for various types of DDLs change scenarios. When you upgrade your existing cluster from versions earlier than v6.5.0 to v6.5.0 or later, TiDB automatically enables metadata lock. To disable this feature, you can set the system variable [`tidb_enable_metadata_lock`](/system-variables.md#tidb_enable_metadata_lock-new-in-v630) to `OFF`.
```
@qiancai PTAL

    Starting from v6.5.0, TiDB supports pushing down the `SELECT` clause (analytical query) of the `INSERT INTO SELECT` statement to TiFlash. In this way, you can easily save the TiFlash query result to a TiDB table specified by `INSERT INTO` for further analysis, which takes effect as result caching (that is, result materialization). For example:

    ```sql
    INSERT INTO t2 SELECT Mod(x,y) FROM t1;
    ```

    During the experimental phase, this feature is disabled by default. To enable it, you can set the [`tidb_enable_tiflash_read_for_write_stmt`](/system-variables.md#tidb_enable_tiflash_read_for_write_stmt-new-in-v630) system variable to `ON`. There are no special restrictions on the result table specified by `INSERT INTO` for this feature, and you are free to add or not add a TiFlash replica to that result table. Typical usage scenarios of this feature include:

    - Run complex analytical queries using TiFlash
    - Reuse TiFlash query results or deal with highly concurrent online requests
    - Need a relatively small result set compared with the input data size, preferably smaller than 100 MiB.

>     For more information, see [documentation](/tiflash/tiflash-results-materialization.md).

Author: ```suggestion
  For more information, see [documentation](/tiflash/tiflash-results-materialization.md).
```

* Support binding history execution plans (experimental) [#39199](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/39199) @[fzzf678](https://github.com/fzzf678)

    For a SQL statement, due to various factors during execution, the optimizer might occasionally choose a new execution plan instead of its previous optimal execution plan, and the SQL performance is impacted. In this case, if the optimal execution plan has not been cleared yet, it still exists in the SQL execution history.

    In v6.5.0, TiDB supports binding historical execution plans by extending the binding object in the [`CREATE [GLOBAL | SESSION] BINDING`](/sql-statements/sql-statement-create-binding.md) statement. When the execution plan of a SQL statement changes, you can bind the original execution plan by specifying `plan_digest` in the `CREATE [GLOBAL | SESSION] BINDING` statement to quickly recover SQL performance, as long as the original execution plan is still in the SQL execution history memory table (for example, `statements_summary`). This feature can simplify the process of handling execution plan change issues and improve your maintenance efficiency.

>     For more information, see [documentation](/sql-plan-management.md#bind-historical-execution-plans).

Author: ```suggestion
    For more information, see [documentation](/sql-plan-management.md#create-a-binding-according-to-a-historical-execution-plan).
```

    After this policy is enabled, if you log in to TiDB with incorrect passwords multiple times consecutively, the account is temporarily locked. After the lock time ends, the account is automatically unlocked.

    For more information, see [documentation](/password-management.md#failed-login-tracking-and-temporary-account-locking-policy).

### Observability

* TiDB Dashboard can be deployed on Kubernetes as an independent Pod [#1447](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb-dashboard/issues/1447) @[SabaPing](https://github.com/SabaPing)

    TiDB v6.5.0 (and later) and TiDB Operator v1.4.0 (and later) support deploying TiDB Dashboard as an independent Pod on Kubernetes. Using TiDB Operator, you can access the IP address of this Pod to start TiDB Dashboard.

    Independently deploying TiDB Dashboard provides the following benefits:

    - The compute work of TiDB Dashboard does not pose pressure on PD nodes. This ensures more stable cluster operation.
    - The user can still access TiDB Dashboard for diagnosis even if the PD node is unavailable.

>     - Accessing TiDB Dashboard in Internet does not involve the privileged interfaces of PD. Therefore, the security risk of the cluster is reduced.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - Accessing TiDB Dashboard on the internet does not involve the privileged interfaces of PD. Therefore, the security risk of the cluster is reduced.
```

>     - Accessing TiDB Dashboard in Internet does not involve the privileged interfaces of PD. Therefore, the security risk of the cluster is reduced.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - Accessing TiDB Dashboard on the internet does not involve the privileged interfaces of PD. Therefore, the security risk of the cluster is reduced.
```

    For more information, see [documentation](/optimizer-hints.md#hints-that-take-effect-globally).

* Support pushing down sorting operations of [partitioned tables](/partitioned-table.md) to TiKV [#26166](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/26166) @[winoros](https://github.com/winoros)

    Although the [partitioned table](/partitioned-table.md) feature has been GA since v6.1.0, TiDB is continually improving its performance. In v6.5.0, TiDB supports pushing down sorting operations such as `ORDER BY` and `LIMIT` to TiKV for computation and filtering, which reduces network I/O overhead and improves SQL performance when you use partitioned tables.

> * Optimizer introduces a more accurate Cost Model Version 2 [#35240](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/35240) @[qw4990](https://github.com/qw4990)

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
* Optimizer introduces a more accurate Cost Model Version 2 (GA) [#35240](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/35240) @[qw4990](https://github.com/qw4990)
```

> * Optimizer introduces a more accurate Cost Model Version 2 [#35240](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/35240) @[qw4990](https://github.com/qw4990)

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
* Optimizer introduces a more accurate Cost Model Version 2 (GA) [#35240](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/35240) @[qw4990](https://github.com/qw4990)
```

    Cost Model Version 2 becomes a generally available feature that significantly improves the overall capability of the TiDB optimizer and helps TiDB evolve towards a more powerful HTAP database.

    For more information, see [documentation](/cost-model.md#cost-model-version-2).

* TiFlash optimizes the operations of getting the number of table rows [#37165](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/37165) @[elsa0520](https://github.com/elsa0520)

>     In the scenarios of data analysis, It is a common operation to get the actual number of rows of a table through `COUNT(*)` without filter conditions. In v6.5.0, TiFlash optimizes the rewriting of `COUNT(*)` and automatically selects the not-null columns with the shortest column definition to count the number of rows, which can effectively reduce the number of I/O operations in TiFlash and improve the execution efficiency of getting row count.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    In the scenarios of data analysis, It is a common operation to get the actual number of rows of a table through `COUNT(*)` without filter conditions. In v6.5.0, TiFlash optimizes the rewriting of `COUNT(*)` and automatically selects the not-null columns with the shortest column definition to count the number of rows, which can effectively reduce the number of I/O operations in TiFlash and improve the execution efficiency of getting row counts.
```

    For more information, see [documentation](/configure-memory-usage.md).

### Ease of use

* Refine the execution information of the TiFlash `TableFullScan` operator in the `EXPLAIN ANALYZE` output [#5926](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflash/issues/5926) @[hongyunyan](https://github.com/hongyunyan)

    The `EXPLAIN ANALYZE` statement is used to print execution plans and runtime statistics. In v6.5.0, TiFlash has refined the execution information of the `TableFullScan` operator by adding the DMFile-related execution information. Now the TiFlash data scan status information is presented more intuitively, which helps you analyze TiFlash performance more easily.

    For more information, see [documentation](/sql-statements/sql-statement-explain-analyze.md).

* Support the output of execution plans in the JSON format [#39261](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/39261) @[fzzf678](https://github.com/fzzf678)

>     In v6.5.0, TiDB extends the output format of execution plans. By using `EXPLAIN FORMAT=tidb_json <SQL_statement>`, you can output SQL execution plans in the JSON format. With this capability, SQL debugging tools and diagnostic tools can read execution plans more conveniently and accurately, thus improving the ease of use of SQL diagnosis and tuning.

Author: ```suggestion
    In v6.5.0, TiDB extends the output format of execution plans. By specifying `FORMAT = "tidb_json"` in the `EXPLAIN` statement, you can output SQL execution plans in the JSON format. With this capability, SQL debugging tools and diagnostic tools can read execution plans more conveniently and accurately, thus improving the ease of use of SQL diagnosis and tuning.
```

>     In v6.5.0, TiDB extends the output format of execution plans. By using `EXPLAIN FORMAT=tidb_json <SQL_statement>`, you can output SQL execution plans in the JSON format. With this capability, SQL debugging tools and diagnostic tools can read execution plans more conveniently and accurately, thus improving the ease of use of SQL diagnosis and tuning.

Author: ```suggestion
    In v6.5.0, TiDB extends the output format of execution plans. By specifying `FORMAT = "tidb_json"` in the `EXPLAIN` statement, you can output SQL execution plans in the JSON format. With this capability, SQL debugging tools and diagnostic tools can read execution plans more conveniently and accurately, thus improving the ease of use of SQL diagnosis and tuning.
```

    In the process of migrating incremental data from upstream to downstream databases, there is a small probability that data flow might cause errors or data loss. In scenarios where strong data consistency is required, such as credit and securities businesses, you can perform a full volume checksum on the data after migration to ensure data consistency. However, in some incremental replication scenarios, upstream and downstream writes are continuous and uninterrupted because the upstream and downstream data is constantly changing, making it difficult to perform consistency checks on all data.

    Previously, you needed to interrupt the business to validate the full data, which would affect your business. Now, with this feature, you can perform incremental data validation without interrupting the business.

    For more information, see [documentation](/dm/dm-continuous-data-validation.md).

### TiDB data share subscription

* TiCDC supports replicating changed logs to storage sinks (experimental) [#6797](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/6797) @[zhaoxinyu](https://github.com/zhaoxinyu)

>      TiCDC supports replicating changed logs to Amazon S3, Azure Blob Storage, NFS, and other S3-compatible storage services. Cloud storage is reasonably priced and easy to use. If you do not want to use Kafka, you can use storage sinks. TiCDC saves the changed logs to a file and then sends it to the storage system. From the storage system, the consumer program reads the newly generated changed log files periodically.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
     TiCDC supports replicating changed logs to Amazon S3, Azure Blob Storage, NFS, and other S3-compatible storage services. Cloud storage is reasonably priced and easy to use. If you are not using Kafka, you can use storage sinks. TiCDC saves the changed logs to a file and then sends it to the storage system. From the storage system, the consumer program reads the newly generated changed log files periodically.
```

    The storage sink supports changed logs in the canal-json and CSV formats. For more information, see [documentation](/ticdc/ticdc-sink-to-cloud-storage.md).

* TiCDC supports bidirectional replication between two clusters [#38587](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/38587) @[xiongjiwei](https://github.com/xiongjiwei) @[asddongmen](https://github.com/asddongmen)

>     TiCDC supports bidirectional replication between two TiDB clusters. If you need a multi-master TiDB solution for your application, especially a multi-master solution across multiple regions, you can use this feature to build one. By configuring the `bdr-mode = true` parameter for the TiCDC changefeeds from one TiDB cluster to another TiDB cluster, you can achieve bidirectional data replication between the two TiDB clusters.

Author: ```suggestion
    TiCDC supports bidirectional replication between two TiDB clusters. If you need to build a multi-master TiDB topology across multiple regions for your application, you can use this feature as the solution. By configuring the `bdr-mode = true` parameter for the TiCDC changefeeds from one TiDB cluster to another TiDB cluster, you can achieve bidirectional data replication between the two TiDB clusters.
```

Author: @ran-huang PTAL

> * TiCDC supports bidirectional replication across multiple clusters [#38587](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/38587) @[xiongjiwei](https://github.com/xiongjiwei) @[asddongmen](https://github.com/asddongmen)
> 
>     TiCDC supports bidirectional replication across multiple TiDB clusters. If you need a multi-master TiDB solution for your application, especially a multi-master solution across multiple regions, you can use this feature to build one. By configuring the `bdr-mode = true` parameter for the TiCDC changefeeds from each TiDB cluster to the other TiDB clusters, you can achieve bidirectional data replication across multiple TiDB clusters.

Author: ```suggestion
* TiCDC supports bidirectional replication between two clusters [#38587](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/38587) @[xiongjiwei](https://github.com/xiongjiwei) @[asddongmen](https://github.com/asddongmen)

    TiCDC supports bidirectional replication between two TiDB clusters. If you need a multi-master TiDB solution for your application, especially a multi-master solution across multiple regions, you can use this feature to build one. By configuring the `bdr-mode = true` parameter for the TiCDC changefeeds from one TiDB cluster to another TiDB cluster, you can achieve bidirectional data replication between the two TiDB clusters.
```

>     TiCDC supports bidirectional replication between two TiDB clusters. If you need to build geo-distributed and multiple active data centers for your application, you can use this feature as a solution. By configuring the `bdr-mode = true` parameter for the TiCDC changefeeds from one TiDB cluster to another TiDB cluster, you can achieve bidirectional data replication between the two TiDB clusters.

Author: @ran-huang PTAL. Thanks.

>     TiCDC supports bidirectional replication between two TiDB clusters. If you need to build geo-distributed and multiple active data centers for your application, you can use this feature as a solution. By configuring the `bdr-mode = true` parameter for the TiCDC changefeeds from one TiDB cluster to another TiDB cluster, you can achieve bidirectional data replication between the two TiDB clusters.

Author: "multiple active data centers" are used in other TiDB docs as well, so we can use it consistently.

    For more information, see [documentation](/ticdc/ticdc-bidirectional-replication.md).

* TiCDC supports updating TLS online [#7908](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/7908) @[CharlesCheung96](https://github.com/CharlesCheung96)

>     To keep data secure, you need to set an expiration policy for the certificate used by the system. After the expiration period, the system needs a new certificate. TiCDC v6.5.0 supports online updates of TLS certificates. Without interrupting the replication tasks, TiCDC can automatically detect and update the certificate, without the need for manual intervention.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    To keep security of the database system, you need to set an expiration policy for the certificate used by the system. After the expiration period, the system needs a new certificate. TiCDC v6.5.0 supports online updates of TLS certificates. Without interrupting the replication tasks, TiCDC can automatically detect and update the certificate, without the need for manual intervention.
```

* TiCDC performance improves significantly [#7540](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/7540) [#7478](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/7478) [#7532](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/7532) @[sdojjy](https://github.com/sdojjy) [@3AceShowHand](https://github.com/3AceShowHand)

>     In a test scenario of the TiDB cluster, the performance of TiCDC has improved significantly. Specifically, the maximum row changes that a single TiCDC can process reaches 30K rows/s, and the replication latency is reduced to 10s. Even during TiKV and TiCDC rolling upgrade, the replication latency is less than 30s. In a disaster recovery (DR) scenario, when the throughput is 35000 rows/s, the replication latency can be maintained at 2s.

Author: ```suggestion
    In a test scenario of the TiDB cluster, the performance of TiCDC has improved significantly. Specifically, the maximum row changes that a single TiCDC can process reaches 30K rows/s, and the replication latency is reduced to 10s. Even during TiKV and TiCDC rolling upgrade, the replication latency is less than 30s. In a disaster recovery (DR) scenario, by using TiCDC redo logs and Syncpoint, the TiCDC throughput of [replicating data to Kafka](/replicate-data-to-kafka.md) can be improved from 4000 rows/s to 35000 rows/s, and the replication latency can be maintained at 2s.
```

Author: @hfxsd PTAL. Thanks.

Reviewer 2: using --> enabling? Rest LGTM

    For more information, see [documentation](https://tikv.org/docs/latest/concepts/explore-tikv-features/backup-restore/).

## Compatibility changes

### System variables

| Variable name | Change type | Description |
|--------|------------------------------|------|
|[`tidb_enable_amend_pessimistic_txn`](/system-variables.md#tidb_enable_amend_pessimistic_txn-new-in-v407)| Deprecated | Starting from v6.5.0, this variable is deprecated, and TiDB uses the [Metadata Lock](/metadata-lock.md) feature by default to avoid the `Information schema is changed` error. |
| [`tidb_enable_outer_join_reorder`](/system-variables.md#tidb_enable_outer_join_reorder-new-in-v610) | Modified | Changes the default value from `OFF` to `ON` after further tests, meaning that the support of Outer Join for the [Join Reorder](/join-reorder.md) algorithm is enabled by default. |

> | [`tidb_cost_model_version`](/system-variables.md#tidb_cost_model_version-introduced-new-in-v620) | Modified | Changes the default value from `1` to `2` after further tests, meaning that Cost Model Version 2 is used for index selection and operator selection by default.  |

Author: ```suggestion
| [`tidb_cost_model_version`](/system-variables.md#tidb_cost_model_version-new-in-v620) | Modified | Changes the default value from `1` to `2` after further tests, meaning that Cost Model Version 2 is used for index selection and operator selection by default.  |
```

> | [`tidb_enable_gc_aware_memory_track`](/system-variables#tidb_enable_gc_aware_memory_track)  |  Modified |   Changes the default value from `ON` to `OFF`. Because the GC-aware memory track is found inaccurate in tests and causes too large analyzed memory size tracked, the memory track is disabled. In addition, in Golang 1.19, the memory tracked by the GC-aware memory track does not have much impact on the overall memory.  |

Author: ```suggestion
| [`tidb_enable_gc_aware_memory_track`](/system-variables。md#tidb_enable_gc_aware_memory_track)  |  Modified |   Changes the default value from `ON` to `OFF`. Because the GC-aware memory track is found inaccurate in tests and causes too large analyzed memory size tracked, the memory track is disabled. In addition, in Golang 1.19, the memory tracked by the GC-aware memory track does not have much impact on the overall memory.  |
```

### Configuration file parameters

| Configuration file | Configuration parameter | Change type | Description |
| -------- | -------- | -------- | -------- |
| TiDB | [`server-memory-quota`](/tidb-configuration-file.md#server-memory-quota-new-in-v409) | Deprecated | Since v6.5.0, this configuration item is deprecated. Instead, use the system variable [`tidb_server_memory_limit`](/system-variables.md#tidb_server_memory_limit-new-in-v640) to manage memory globally. |
| TiDB | [`disconnect-on-expired-password`](/tidb-configuration-file.md#disconnect-on-expired-password-new-in-v650) | Newly added | Determines whether TiDB disconnects the client connection when the password is expired. The default value is `true`, which means the client connection is disconnected when the password is expired. |
| TiKV | `raw-min-ts-outlier-threshold` | Deleted | Since v6.4.0, this configuration item was deprecated. Since v6.5.0, this configuration item is deleted. |
| TiKV | [`cdc.min-ts-interval`](/tikv-configuration-file.md#min-ts-interval)  | Modified | To reduce CDC latency, the default value is changed from `1s` to `200ms`. |

> | TiKV | [`memory-use-ratio`](/tikv-configuration-file.md#memory-use-ratio-introduced-new-in-v650) | Newly added | Indicates the ratio of available memory to total system memory in PITR log recovery. |

Author: ```suggestion
| TiKV | [`memory-use-ratio`](/tikv-configuration-file.md#memory-use-ratio-new-in-v650) | Newly added | Indicates the ratio of available memory to total system memory in PITR log recovery. |
```
